I went to Fethiye for the first time, last Monday
my friend did paragliding there.
i swam in the sea for a while
and then we went to the Valley of Butterflies together
we ate some food in a restaurant
and then we got back to Muğla the city centre

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
this morning i was very sleepy, i didn't wake up early
i had breakfast and i came to the school by bus
i will get back home when my lesson is over
i dont know actually i want to nap after that 
and then i will make up, i will go to the Marmaris for the show

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
When my mother came to Muğla for the first time
We went to Akyaka together and visit Azmak Creek
we ate fish together and my mum got back home.

and then my friend came to muğla
and we went to Akyaka together 
I bought a magnet for my mum
she only has came twice so far
and I texted/engraved something as a memory on the magnet for my mum with my friends

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
i will talk about last summer
i have been in izmir, it was very exciting because i can see what happened/changed in front of me in a year.
and actually, i didn't want muğla as a preference for university, so the city is at the end of my preference list.
When I got admitted to the university in Muğla, I cried but I feel happy now, I think I feel lucky about this decision. 

Muğla is a beautiful city, very nice and i like the sea.
and I feel free in kötekli you know places around the university because everybody looks relaxed

Firstly, i stayed in a dormitory but now I stay  with my friend in a house.
Luckily, She is my childhood friend

--> What do you think about her?
she never lie to me
she considers what is right for me
she will get back home soon, she is in Izmir now.
i dont know when will she come. 

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

i work in Babylon Club, Monday, Thursday and Saturday
i have three shows
the first show is at twelve
the second show is at half past one
the third show is at half past two

---how long have you been working there?
since two months (sins diye okunur)


last sunday i did my homework and i couldnt make sentences about perfect tenses
i cant understand perfect tense in english

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

what do you think about your future?
actually i want to improve myself about dancing
and four years later i want to be a good engineer in Metallurgy and Materials Engineering field
I want to have a big house in Muğla or Ayvalık.
and I want to own a small dog and grow up with it.
maybe, this year I will go abroad, but i dont know where to go, at least not yet.

maybe I will be married ten years later.
i want to learn Chinese and Spanish
because Chinese is important to my field. when I went to Istanbul TUYAP Fair. I saw a lot of Chinese people ---> 
actually, Chinese people know English, I can understand them, however, i want to learn their language because Chinese is a different language and culture
also I want to learn Spanish. Spanish is like Turkish. It is a language that is read as it is written


i want to visit South Korea because i love sushi much,
i ate Sushi in Akyaka last month, i paid 500 lira, and just for 18 rolls... It was very expensive.
i want to taste different sushis in South Korea


---> What are you going to do tomo?
i will do my homework and i think i will watch a film with my boyfriend
i will go to Marmaris for the show
maybe I would go for a walk after I got back from Marmaris                        ------> after kullanımı 
I will eat some food because I might feel hungry after the show

I will show some dance movements to a new girl, I will teach her properly

I started to dance in November this year                                           ----------> preposition kullanımı
I have learnt the main movements of the dance show in April,
    after that, we determine the movements for a new show in May



