# Level Detection Exam

A1
    Exchanging greetings.
    Giving personal information.
    Using numbers, days, months, years.
    Asking for and telling the time.
    Describing people.
    Giving information about objects.
    Describing places.
    Describing habits and routines.
    Expressing likes and dislikes.
    Describing simple actions.



A2
    Describing habits and daily routines                       Can you tell me your day?
                                                               What do you do all day?
    Expressing ability and inability                           Do you think you can learn English well?
    Describing past experiences                                Where had you lived before you lived there?
    Asking for and giving directions                           Where exactly is your job there?
    Describing personality and feelings                        What kind of personality do you think you have?
                                                               Have you ever thought about what people think of you?
    Making comparisons                                         If you make a comparison, what trait and personality do you have that distinguishes you from other people?
    Describing jobs                                            What is your occupation? 
                                                               Can you describe your job to me?
    Describing places                                          What do you think about the place you live?
                                                               What can you do as an activity in the city you live in?
    Making requests (e.g. at a restaurant)
    Expressing future plans                                    What do you think about your future?
                                                               Do you have any dreams that you want to realize?



B1
    Describing experiences and events
    Expressing hopes and ambitions
    Describing feelings
    Giving reasons
    Giving opinions
    Expressing preferences
    Stating obligations
    Expressing certainty
    Describing events in the past
    Describing events in the future


B2
    Describing experiences
    Expressing opinions
    Expressing agreement and disagreement
    Giving advice with advantages and disadvantages
    Making suggestions
    Expressing feelings and emotions
    Reporting events
    Speculating about events in past, present, future
    Adding emphasis
    Describing hopes and regrets


C1
    Expressing feelings and attitudes
    Emphasising an issue or a feeling
    Expressing opinions tentatively
    Developing an argument systematically
    Negotiating and conceding
    Describing cause and effect
    Expressing empathy and sympathy
    Expressing reservations
    Speculating about events in past, present, future
    Discussing complex subjects in detail


C2
    Express yourself fluently and precisely in any topic
    Includes complex situations and the ability to communicate accurately in formal and informal settings


