

C1 Subjects.

The Tenses
	Revision (with a focus on their advanced uses)
		- Past
		- Present
		- Future

		I'm sure my hubby will have noticed that I used all the milk this morning
				  -----------------

	to be set to
	to be on the verge of

	Her iki ifade de gelecekte gerçekleşecek olan olayları anlatmak için kullanılır.

	"To be set to" ifadesi, gelecekte yapılması planlanan veya yapılması beklenen bir eylemi/zamanı ifade etmek için kullanılırken, 
	"to be on the verge of" ifadesi, bir şeyin olması çok yakın zamanda, hemen hemen gerçekleşmek üzere olduğu anlamında kullanılır.

	The new movie is set to be released next month.			(Yeni film, gelecek ay piyasaya sürülmeye hazır.)
	The government is set to announce new economic reforms.		(Hükümet, yeni ekonomik reformları duyurmaya hazırlanıyor.)
	The team is set to compete in the championship finals.		(Takım, şampiyona finallerine katılmaya hazır.)

	The company is on the verge of launching its new product.	(Şirket, yeni ürününü piyasaya sürmek üzere.)
	She was on the verge of tears after hearing the bad news.	(O, kötü haberleri duyduktan sonra gözyaşlarının eşiğindeydi.)
	The negotiations were on the verge of collapsing, but a last-minute agreement was reached.
									(Müzakereler çökmek üzereydi, ancak son dakikada anlaşma sağlandı.)
	The old building is on the verge of being demolished to make way for a new development.
									(Eski bina, yerini yeni bir projeye bırakmak üzere yıkılmak üzere.)



Modals
	- Speculation
		Bir tahminde bulunma veya olası durumları ifade etme bağlamında kullanılabilirler. 
		
		It must have rained last night. 
		She might / might not have registered for the seminar
		She might be coming to the party tonight.				(O, bu gece partiye gelebilir.)
		They could be on vacation because their office is closed this week.	(Bu hafta ofisleri kapalı olduğuna göre, tatilde olabilirler.)
		He must be studying for his exams; I haven't seen him all day.		(Bütün gün onu görmedim, sınavları için çalışıyor olmalı.)
		The team should be preparing for the big match tomorrow.		(Takım, yarınki büyük maça hazırlık yapıyor olmalı.)
		They can't be serious about their decision; it's too risky.		(Onların kararı ciddi olamaz; çok riskli.)
		It may rain later, so we should bring our umbrellas.			(Daha sonra yağmur yağabilir, bu yüzden şemsiyelerimizi getirmeliyiz.)
		The concert might have been canceled due to the bad weather.		(Konser, kötü hava nedeniyle iptal edilmiş olabilir.)
		She could have missed the train; that's why she's late.			(Treni kaçırmış olabilir, bu yüzden geç kalmış.)
		He should have arrived by now, but I haven't seen him.			(Şimdiye kadar gelmiş olmalıydı, ama onu görmedim.)
		They can't have finished the project yet; it's too complex.		(Projeyi henüz bitirmiş olamazlar; çok karmaşık.)

	- Deduction
		Bir tahminde bulunma veya çıkarım yapma durumunda kullanılabilirler. Geçmişteki olayları yorumlarken kullanışlıdır. 

		She must be at home because her car is in the driveway.			(Arabası garajda olduğuna göre, o evde olmalı.)
		The children can't be in school; it's already 4 PM.			(Çocuklar okulda olamaz; zaten saat 4.)
		He might have forgotten about the meeting.				(Toplantıyı unutmuş olabilir.)
		They could be stuck in traffic.						(Trafikte sıkışmış olabilirler.)
		The movie should be starting soon.					(Film yakında başlamalı.)
		It may rain later, so take an umbrella with you.			(Daha sonra yağmur yağabilir, bu yüzden yanına bir şemsiye al.)
		They can't have arrived yet; the train was delayed.			(Henüz gelmemiş olamazlar; tren rötar yapmıştı.)
		He must have misunderstood what I said.					(Benim söylediğimi yanlış anlamış olmalı.)
		She could have gone shopping, but I'm not sure.				(Alışverişe gitmiş olabilir, ama emin değilim.)
		The team should have won the match based on their performance.		(Takım performanslarına göre maçı kazanmış olmalıydı.)










	- Modal verbs with adverbs that collocate with them

		They could conceivably have driven all that way in one night, but it's unlikely
		     -----------------
		Can:
		Easily: She can easily solve the puzzle.
		Hardly: I can hardly hear what you're saying.
		Could:
		Possibly: He could possibly join us later.
		Never: I could never imagine doing that.
		May:
		Perhaps: She may perhaps come to the party.
		Maybe: It may maybe rain tomorrow.
		Might:
		Possibly: He might possibly change his mind.
		Maybe: They might maybe be late.
		Must:
		Certainly: It must certainly be challenging.
		Clearly: She must clearly understand the instructions.
		Shall:
		Certainly: Shall we certainly go to the event?
		Quickly: Shall I quickly finish the report?
		Should:
		Definitely: You should definitely try the new restaurant.
		Really: She should really consider that option.
		Will:
		Definitely: He will definitely win the competition.
		Certainly: I will certainly attend the meeting.
		Would:
		Probably: He would probably love to visit that place.
		Likely: She would likely enjoy the movie.
		Ought to:
		Definitely: You ought to definitely apologize.
		Certainly: He ought to certainly be more careful.


	- the odds are: (something) is likely to happen.
	- I dare say
		I dare say I will have to brush up on my grammar before I do a new course

Conditionals
	- A range of words and phrases to replace "if"
	- take your conditionals to more advanced level

	But for a wonderful trip to Spain when I was younger, I would never have decided to learn the language.
	-------
	Given that I'd like to achieve the C1 level of English, I'm going to have to study harder
	----------

Passive Voice
	- Passive Infinitive
	- Passive -ing forms

	Lucy recalled having been taught about the passive voice at some point in the past.
		      ------------------
	There's nothing to do
		There's nothing to be done


Negative Inversion
	- To add emphasis and variation to your writing and speaking

		Never have I seen such a beautiful sunset.
		-----------------
		Such was the commotion that I could barely hear myself think
		----------------------

Hedging and Boosting
	Hedging is a linguistic strategy that allows speakers to soften or downplay the force of their statements
	- to seem
	- the passive voice
	- adverbs like "presumably"

		It seems like this might be a good solution

	Boosting involves using language to increase the force or impact of a statement 
	- adverbs like "undeniably"
	- strong verbs like "to prove"

		This has been proven to be the best solution to our problem.

Phrasal Verbs with Multiple Meanings
	to set up	to organize or arrange		"to set up time for a meeting"
			people on a date		"My friend set me up with her cousin"
			to trick someone		"You set me up when you told me it was a fancy dress party. Everyone else was in black tie."
			to put things into place	"I need to set up my filming studio so i can make some lessons"

Conjunctions and Connectors
	- Coordinating
	- Correlative 
	- Subordinating


---------------------

(C1)
 Toplumsal sorunlar hakkında kendi görüş ve çözümlerini belirten yazılar/makaleler yazabilirler.

C1-C2 kursunda hızlı konu anlatımından sonraki eklenecek konular;
	Kısaltmalar (Ving, V3, to be V0, Having V3, Having been V3) yani Adjective, Noun ve bazı özel konuların Kısaltmaları Writing temelinde işlenecektir.
	Kafa karışıklığı yaratan (as, for, since, so, should, either, neither, rather, It boş öznesi vb.) kalıplar
	Vurgu yapıları incelenecektir.
	Indirect Speech (reported speech de denir) birisinin söylediği cümleyi aktarmaya denir. Genellikle konuşma dilinde kullanılır.
	Inversion; Devrik cümle
	Ayrık tümceler (Cleft Sentences).
	Extra Kalıpsal yapılar bütünüyle işlenecektir.

(C1/C2 Seviyesi Dil Bilgisi Konuları)
Extended use of previous grammar points (especially passive voice, relative clauses, noun clauses, adverbial clauses, if clauses, causatives etc.)
Participle clauses
Inversion (with negative adverbs, as, if clauses etc.)
Cleft sentences (It is Jack that broke the window, etc.) and emphasizing
Subjunctives (He suggests that my father stop smoking, etc.)



İnversions (Devrik Cümle Yapıları)
	Temel amacı cümlede vurgu yapmaktır. 
	Örneğin; “Hardly do i have milk with coffee” (kahveyi sütle içtiğim neredeyse olmamıştır). 
	Burada basitçe “I have never mik with tea” denilebilirdi ancak devrik cümle yapısı kullanılarak bu durumun karşı tarafa çarpıcı bir şekilde aktarılması yani vurgulanması gerçekleştirilmiştir.
	Bir diğer örnek; “ Scarcely did Einstein sleep more than 4 hours in a day” ( Einstein nadiren günde 4 saatten fazla uyurdu”
	Burada da yine cümleyi daha basit yapılı kurup aynı anlamı verebilirdi. Hali hazırda bakıldığında cümlenin zaten fiili vardır ve soru cümlesi de değildir, burada baştaki “did” fiili kullanılarak vurgu yapılmıştır. 

“Subjunctive” 
	konusu esas itibariyle belirli sıfat, fiil ya da isimlerden sonra “that” ile kapanan bir “noun clause” dan sonra gelen fiil her ne olursa olsun ya yalnızca “V1” ya da “Should + V1” yapısının kullanılmasıdır.
	Yani bu fiiller “that” ile kapandığında arkadaki cümle ardından gelen cümlenin yapısı her ne olursa olsun “v1” ya da “should v1” şeklinde biter. Kullanılan fiillerin neler olduğundan bahsetmek gerekirse;
	Advice
	Recommend 
	Ask
	Command
	Propose
	Order
	Require
	Request
	Desire
	Prefer
	Forbid
	Demand 
	Cümle içindeki örneklerini incelersek;

	“I advise that he should learn Spanish” (İspanyolca öğrenmesi gerektiğini tavsiye ediyorum)

	Subjunctive konusunda cümle “passive” yapıdaysa ise be+v3 kullanılır.

	“People propose that their houses should be cleaned every day” (insanlar evlerinin her gün temizlenmesi gerektiğini önerirler)

Reduction (Kısaltma)	
	Kısaltmalar cümlelerde farkında olmadan sıklıkla gördüğümüz “who-which-that” gibi bağlaçların cümle içinde kullanılmadan cümlede kısaltma yapılmasıdır.
	Örneğin “The woman who lives downstairs is making too much noise” 
	“The woman lives downstairs is making too much noise”
	Veya
	“My bag ‘which’ was more expensive than yours, faded suddenly”. Yine bu cümleden de “which” çıkarıldığında herhangi bir anlam düşüklüğü olmaz.

Linking Words
	Bir sonuç belirtirken kullandığımız “linking words” lerin en önemlileri şunlardır:

	As a result  (“ There was a heavy rain as a result there was no any taxi around.”)
	Therefore
	Thus
	Consequently
	For this reason
	As
	Since
	Due to /owing to
	As a result of
	Caused by

Daha önce öğrenilen konularda ayrıntılı olarak bilgi sahibi olmak: Özellikle passive voice, relative clauses, noun clauses, adverbial clauses, if clauses ve causatives konuları hakkında gerekli tüm çalışmalar yapılmalıdır.
Participle clauses: Fiillere –ing ekleyerek yapılan çeşitli kullanım biçimlerine verilen b2 seviye İngilizce konusudur.
Inversion: İngilizce devrik cümle kurma yöntemidir.


C2
near-native understanding
comprehend and summarize almost everything you read and listen to, including colloquialisms or regional language
express yourself with an understanding of the finest nuances of English in just about any situation



patience - passion


