https://app.box.com/s/r5jpbli7blwm20flbvmhqcxx6ih7m96q


1. - 8. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

01.
Bilgisayar icat edilir edilmez, bilim insanları ve mühendisler tarafından bilgisayarlara yönelik ilgi giderek arttı ve 1940'larda çok sayıda üniversite bilgisayarları üretmek için kendi projelerini başlattı.
As soon as the computer was invented, a growing ---- for computers by scientists and engineers evolved, and numerous universities started their own projects to produce them in the 1940s.
                                                                                              geliştirmek    çok sayıda
isolation        izolasyon
concern          kaygı, endişe, ilgi
awareness        farkındalık
demand           talep                          .d
variety          çeşitlilik

02.
Antibiyotikler, vücuttaki mikroorganizmaların dengesini bozarak ve bağırsaklarınızdaki iyi bakterilerin çoğunu öldürerek sağlığınız üzerinde belirli etkiler yaratabilir.
By messing with the balance of microorganisms in the body and by killing too many of the good bacteria in your gut, antibiotics may have certain ---- effects on your health.
prevalent         yaygın
negligible        ihmal edilebilir                    neglect - gözardı etmek, ihmal etmek
damaging          zarar verici          .c
consistent        tutarlı
abundant          bol


03.
Current research has suggested that people who consume more trans fatty acids have ---- greater levels of aggression.            Güncel araştırmalar, daha fazla trans yağ asidi tüketen kişilerin daha yüksek düzeyde saldırganlığa sahip olduğunu ileri sürüyor.
independently       bağımsız bir şekilde
significantly       önemli ölçüde                                  .b
deliberately        kasten
mutually            karşılıklı olarak
preciously          kıymetli şekilde

04.
In crime scene investigation, forensic science ---- evidence that may link a suspect to a crime or prove him or her innocent.
        Olay yeri incelemesinde, adli tıp, bir şüpheliyi bir suçla ilişkilendirebilecek veya onun masum olduğunu kanıtlayabilecek delillerdir.

initiates                 başlatır
accelerates               hızlandırır
precedes                  önce gelir
counters                  karşılık verir
provides                  sağlar                        .e





05.
Bugün bilindiği şekliyle beyzbol oyunu benzersiz bir şekilde Amerika'ya ait olsa da, Rounders adı verilen popüler İngiliz çocuk sopası ve top oyunudur.
Although the game of baseball as it is known today is uniquely American, it ---- the popular English children’s bat-and-ball game called rounders.
gets along            iyi geçinir 
derives from          türeyen için                 .b                        derivation - türev
accounts for          hesap vermek
goes through          geçer
brings about          meydana getirir





06.
Embriyonun implantasyonu insan gelişiminde bir dönüm noktasıdır, çünkü bu aşamadan itibaren embriyonun şekillenmesi ve genel vücut planının oluşması sağlanır.
Implantation of the embryo is a milestone in human development as it is from this stage onwards that the embryo ---- to take shape and the overall body plan ----.
began / had been decided
begins / is decided
had begun / will be decided
will begin / was decided
is beginning / has been decided
.b


07.
Dualizm teorisine rağmen birçok insan hâlâ bilincin bedenin dışında olduğu fikrine bağlı kalıyor.
Even though the theory of dualism ----, many people still cling to the idea that consciousness ---- outside of the body.
has been disproven / can exist                disprove - kanıt çürütmek          .a
was disproven / could exist
is disproven / had to exist
had been disproven / should have existed
will be disproven / must have existed


Büyük Set Resifi, Avustralya'nın kuzeydoğu kıyısı boyunca 2000 kilometreden fazla uzunluğuyla dünyanın en uzun resiflerinden biridir.
The Great Barrier Reef is one of the longest reefs in the world, ---- more than 2000 kilometres along the northeastern coast of Australia.
to have extended                              uzatmak, genişletmek
to extend        
having been extended
extending                                    .d
having extended

                    which extending - uzanan
                    relative clause


sustend
suspect

9. - 15. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

09.
---- İkinci Dünya Savaşı'nda askeri üretime ayrılan fabrikaların birçoğu ---- çatışmalar orijinal sivil kullanımlarına geri döndü.
---- World War II, many of the factories that had been devoted to military production ---- the fighting were converted back to their original, civilian uses.
At / with
Following / during                                  .b
Along / over
Through / within
Across / for



10.
Herhangi bir zihinsel egzersiz bilişe, bilgi taşıyan nöronların yollarının oluşturulmasına, uzatılmasına veya güçlendirilmesine yardımcı olur.
Any mental exercise helps cognition ---- building, lengthening, or strengthening the pathways that carry information ---- neurons.
in / upon
at / with
off / from
towards / beneath
by / between                .e


11.
---- çoğu insan kültürler arası yaşama veya öğrenmeden fayda görebilir, bazıları kültür şoku nedeniyle psikolojik blokajlar ve diğer engelleyici etkiler tecrübe eder.
---- most people can find benefits in cross-cultural living or learning, some experience psychological blocks and other inhibiting effects due to culture shock.

Because          Çünkü 
Only when        Yalnızca 
While            iken, Sırasında                                 .c
Unless           Meğer ki, den başka, olmadıkça
Provided that    Şartıyla



12.
Beyin ölümü, beyinde herhangi bir aktivite belirtisi görülmediğinde, makineler kalbi ve akciğerleri çalışır durumda tuttuğunda meydana gelir.
Brain death happens when the brain shows no signs of any activity, ---- machines are keeping the heart and lungs working.
even if    sa bile                                      .a
in case    durumunda, halinde
because    çünkü
until      e kadar
after      den sonra


13.
Kuş yuvaları türden türe farklılık gösterir ve ---- yuvanın konumu, malzemesi ve şekli de dahil olmak üzere kendine özgü bir mimari tarzı vardır.
Bird nests differ from ---- species to the next, and ---- nest has its own style of architecture, including location, materials, and shape.
other / any
one / each                          .b
some / another
all / whole
every / neither


14.
Ushuaia kasabası, Arjantin'in güney ucunda, Antarktika'ya yakın bir yerde yer alır ve yılın büyük bir bölümünde acı/şiddetli soğuk yaşanır.
The town of Ushuaia lies at the southern tip of Argentina, ---- close to the Antarctic ---- it is bitterly cold for much of the year.
such / that
as / as
the more / the more
either / or
so / that      .e

so        such
öyle      böyle



15.
Çok sayıda İtalyan prenslerinin sarayı, Rönesans ve Barok dönemlerinin önemli merkezleri haline geldi; nispeten küçük siyasi etkileri vardı.
The numerous Italian princes’ palaces became significiant centres of the Renaissance and the Baroque periods ---- their comparatively minor political influence.        nispeten, orantılı olarak
due to          dolayı
rather than       ziyade 
in terms of        açısından 
as well as        birlikte 
despite           aksine          .e



16. - 20. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.
Global warming will bring significant changes to the world as a whole, but the particular types and scales of these impacts will be (16)---- affected by local conditions.
        Küresel ısınma bir bütün olarak dünyaya önemli değişiklikler getirecek, ancak bu etkilerin belirli türleri ve ölçekleri (16)---- yerel koşullardan etkilenecektir.
Climate change will not just have general global effects, but (17)---- time it will create specific impacts within your very own neighbourhood. 
        İklim değişikliğinin yalnızca genel küresel etkileri olmayacak, aynı zamanda (17)---- zaman zaman kendi mahallenizde de belirli etkiler yaratacaktır.
Because the changes people will face vary from place to place, local governments will be best equipped to address these problems as one-size-fits-all solutions (18)----. 
        İnsanların karşılaşacağı değişiklikler yerden yere değiştiği için, yerel yönetimler bu sorunları herkese uyan tek çözüm olarak ele almak için en iyi donanıma sahip olacaklardır (18)----.
National governments that signed and ratified the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change agreed to undertake adaptation planning. 
        BM İklim Değişikliği Çerçeve Sözleşmesini imzalayan ve onaylayan ulusal hükümetler uyum planlaması yapmayı/üstlenmeyi kabul etti.  
Several countries, (19)---- the Dominican Republic, Cuba, and others in the Caribbean, are also undertaking regional planning. 
But fundamentally, (20)---- climate change is happening globally, people need to react locally.
    temelde            although - global, local - contrast

16. a
profoundly - derin şekilde
unintentionally - istemeden
lightly - hafifçe
cautiously - dikkatle
occassionally - ara sıra


17. a
over - over time 
at - bu zamanda
for
during
before

18. b
were not working
will not work        - işe yaramaz.
should not have worked
had not worked
will not have worked

19. b
in case of        durumunda
such as           örneğin 
with regards to   ile ilgili olarak
in terms of       açısından
as a result of    Sonucunda



20. a
although      rağmen 
in case       durumunda 
until         değin, e kadar
since         o zamandan beri 
as soon as    ar.. maz, en kısa zamanda


21. - 28. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz.

21. e
Because of increased migration, geographical proximity, and/or political conquest and colonisation, ----.
        Artan göç, coğrafi yakınlık ve/veya siyasi fetih ve sömürgeleştirme nedeniyle ----.
    bilingualism is often defined as proficiency in both languages                                İki dillilik genellikle her iki dilde de yeterlilik olarak tanımlanır
    in many countries, monolingualism represents the natural or norm of language development      Birçok ülkede tek dillilik, dil gelişiminin doğal veya normunu temsil eder
    multilingual education programs aim for proficiency in more than two languages                Çok dilli eğitim programları ikiden fazla dilde yeterliliği amaçlamaktadır
    bilingual education is the instruction that uses two languages as the media of instruction    İki dilli eğitim, öğretim ortamı olarak iki dili kullanan öğretimdir
    few countries today can claim monolingualism as the norm                                      Bugün çok az ülke tek dilliliğin norm olduğunu iddia edebilir


22. d
Although the Roman Empire finally fell in 476, ----.      Her ne kadar Roma İmparatorluğu nihayet 476'da yıkılmış olsa da, ----.
    the Romans claimed that Romulus founded the city in 753 BCE                        Romalılar, Romulus'un şehri M.Ö. 753'te kurduğunu iddia etti.
    citizenship was given to every free male inhabitant of the empire                  imparatorluğun her özgür erkeğine vatandaşlık verildi
    leading generals wanted more opportunities to win wealth and glory                 önde gelen generaller zenginlik ve zafer kazanmak için daha fazla fırsat istiyordu             
    its influence is still felt in the calendars and alphabets still in use today      etkisi hala takvimlerde ve alfabelerde hissediliyor
    the Roman Republic had a complex political and administrative system               Roma Cumhuriyeti karmaşık bir siyasi ve idari sisteme sahipti



23. a
Although the early principles behind the calculation of an IQ score still hold, ----.
    IQ scores are determined in a different manner today and are known as deviation IQ scores
    some people consistently score higher than others on IQ tests
    psychologists have traditionally been interested in creating intelligence tests
    two-thirds of all individuals fall within 15 IQ points above or below the average score of 100
    IQ scores have proven very beneficial in identifying students in need of special attention

24. b
Although the prices of the first gramophone recordings were incredibly high, ----.
    the recording industry was slow to move into the world of music
    each went on to sell more than a million copies
    they were all written by the prolific composers of the era
    the business was shaped by technological advances
    musicians lacked electronic amplification for recording

25. c
----, recycling is the current solution for dealing with this basic and essential material.                                               Geri dönüşüm, bu temel ve gerekli malzemeyle başa çıkmanın mevcut çözümüdür.
    Despite the fact that researchers are looking beyond the general hazardous consequences of global warming                             Araştırmacıların küresel ısınmanın genel tehlikeli sonuçlarının ötesine bakmalarına rağmen
    As millions of electrical appliances and computers are thrown out annually without any kind of recycling policy to govern them        Milyonlarca elektrikli cihaz ve bilgisayar her yıl, onları yönetecek herhangi bir geri dönüşüm politikası olmadan atılıyor
    While the plastics industry tries to develop a durable natural plastic that will not take thousands of years to break down            Plastik endüstrisi binlerce yıl sürmeyecek, dayanıklı, doğal bir plastik geliştirmeye çalışırken
    Even though paper use in printing is estimated to decrease with more and more people using electronic books                          Her ne kadar giderek daha fazla insanın elektronik kitap kullanması nedeniyle baskıda kağıt kullanımının azalacağı tahmin ediliyor olsa da  
    Since government policies and businesses focused on separating the components of electrical appliances are slowly emerging            Elektrikli cihazların bileşenlerini ayırmaya odaklanan hükümet politikaları ve işletmeler yavaş yavaş ortaya çıktığı için


26. e
The effects of most antidepressant drugs may not be felt for several weeks, so continuing to take the medicine is important ----.
    if you are suffering from its side effects such as weight gain                  kilo alma gibi yan etkilerinden şikayetçiyseniz
    while it reduces the extreme sadness and hopelessness                           aşırı üzüntü ve umutsuzluğu azaltırken
    because the patient’s age may "be taken into account" to adjust its dosage        Çünkü dozajın ayarlanmasında hastanın yaşı dikkate alınabilir.              "dikkat alınmak"
    "given that" psychotherapy could be more effective than using it                  psikoterapinin onu kullanmaktan daha etkili olabileceği "göz önüne alındığında"
    even though it does not seem to be working at first                             ilk başta çalışmıyor gibi görünse de



27. a
Washing and cooking take care of most harmful microbes on or in food ----.
    while others are usually killed by stomach acid or blocked by the immune system
    although the toxic kinds, such as hepatitis virus are more commonly known
    because nowadays people are not taking food safety very seriously
    as most of the current produce seems especially worrisome to many people          worrisome - endişe verici
    after transported fruits and vegetables are loaded with fatal chemicals

28. c
    ----, many countries began to adopt agricultural practices that are more oriented towards conservation and sustainability.
              ---- birçok ülke daha çok koruma ve sürdürülebilirliğe yönelik tarım uygulamalarını benimsemeye başladı.

    As long as they had a wide range of natural and economic resources at hand          Ellerinde çok çeşitli doğal ve ekonomik kaynaklara sahip oldukları sürece
    Although they were on the brink of starvation due to famine and drought             Kıtlık ve kuraklık yüzünden açlığın eşiğinde olmalarına rağmen
    As they came to realise the importance of addressing environmental issues           Çevre sorunlarını ele almanın önemini anladıklarında
    Whether they confronted considerable technological challenges in urban areas        Kentsel alanlarda önemli teknolojik zorluklarla karşılaşıp karşılaşmadıkları
    Until they found solutions to the extinction of species in their natural habitats   Türlerin doğal ortamlarında yok olmasına çözüm bulana kadar



29. - 31. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Jesse Jackson fought for the rights of African Americans during the civil rights movement of the 1960s.  
        Jesse Jackson, 1960'lardaki sivil haklar hareketi sırasında Afrikalı Amerikalıların hakları için savaştı.
Later on he became involved in politics and world affairs. 
        Daha sonra siyaset ve dünya meseleleriyle ilgilenmeye başladı.
Jackson joined the civil rights movement when he was a student. 
        Jackson öğrenciyken sivil haklar hareketine katıldı.
In 1965, he began working for a civil rights group led by the famous Martin Luther King, Jr. 
        1965'te ünlü Martin Luther King Jr. liderliğindeki bir sivil haklar grubu için çalışmaya başladı. 
In 1971, Jackson founded the group People United to Save Humanity (PUSH). 
        1971'de Jackson, People United to Save Humanity (PUSH) grubunu kurdu.
This group helped African Americans to get jobs and to open businesses. 
        Bu grup Afrikalı Amerikalıların iş bulmasına ve iş kurmasına yardımcı oldu.
In 1984, he founded the National Rainbow Coalition (NRC) to help all kinds of people, not just African Americans.
        1984 yılında sadece Afrika kökenli Amerikalılara değil, her türden insana yardım etmek amacıyla Ulusal Gökkuşağı Koalisyonu'nu (NRC) kurdu.
Jackson ran for President of the United States in 1984 and 1988.
        Jackson, 1984 ve 1988'de Amerika Birleşik Devletleri başkanlığına aday oldu.
While he did not win either time, he did better than any other African American presidential candidates who had come before him. 
          Her iki seferde de kazanamasa da, kendisinden önce gelen diğer Afro-Amerikan başkan adaylarından daha iyi bir performans sergiledi.
Jackson also gained a lot of attention for his role in world affairs. 
          Jackson ayrıca dünya meselelerindeki rolüyle de büyük ilgi gördü.
He spoke out against apartheid (separation of the races) in South Africa and took part in peace talks in the Middle East. 
        Güney Afrika'da apartheid'e (ırkların ayrılması) karşı çıktı ve Orta Doğu'daki barış görüşmelerine katıldı.
He also worked with several countries to free US citizens being held as prisoners.
        Ayrıca tutuklu olarak tutulan ABD vatandaşlarının serbest bırakılması için birçok ülkeyle birlikte çalıştı.


29. b
What can be inferred from the passage about the African Americans in the 1970s?      1970'lerdeki Afrikalı Amerikalılarla ilgili pasajdan ne gibi sonuçlar çıkarılabilir?
    No one was willing to help them during this time.
    It was difficult for them to find employment.
    They were all members of the PUSH.
    They were not allowed to run for president.
    They were held in prisons in several other countries.

30. d
Which statement is true about Jesse Jackson’s political involvement?                Jesse Jackson'ın siyasi katılımıyla ilgili hangi ifade doğrudur?
    He was the first African American candidate for president.
    He was primarily interested in helping African Americans in the US.
    He supported apartheid in South Africa as well as in the Middle East.            Güney Afrika'da ve Orta Doğu'da apartheid'ı destekledi.
    He was concerned for the rights of people inside and outside the US.            ABD içindeki ve dışındaki insanların haklarıyla ilgileniyordu.
    He received help from Martin Luther King, Jr. to establish the NRC.

31. d
What is the passage mainly about?
    Jesse Jackson’s election campaign for president
    The human rights groups that Jesse Jackson was a part of
    The reason why Jesse Jackson was a role model to Americans
    Jesse Jackson’s contributions to civil rights movements                         Jesse Jackson'ın sivil haklar hareketlerine katkıları
    Jesse Jackson’s moral beliefs about civil rights





32. - 34. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Functioning mini human brains grown in a lab could help cure Parkinson’s. 
      Laboratuvarda yetiştirilen, çalışan mini insan beyni Parkinson hastalığının tedavisine yardımcı olabilir.
It may sound incredible, yet the created blobs may help researchers defeat Parkinson’s disease and other age-related brain conditions. 
      Kulağa inanılmaz gelebilir ama oluşturulan damlacıklar, araştırmacıların Parkinson hastalığını ve yaşa bağlı diğer beyin rahatsızlıklarını yenmesine yardımcı olabilir.
The mini brain is an organoid grown from stem cells to imitate the human midbrain, the ‘information superhighway’ of the brain that controls hearing, vision and movement. 
      Mini beyin, beynin işitmeyi, görmeyi ve hareketi kontrol eden 'bilgi üstotoyolu' olan insan orta beynini taklit etmek için kök hücrelerden yetiştirilen bir organoiddir.
Other researchers have successfully grown brain tissue in a lab, 
      Diğer araştırmacılar beyin dokusunu laboratuvarda başarıyla büyüttüler.
    but a team made up of researchers from A Star Genome Institute of Singapore, the Duke-NUS Medical School and the National Neuroscience Institute say theirs is the first to contain neuromelanin, a dark pigment found within the human brain that is closely linked to the development of Parkinson’s disease.
    ancak Singapur A Yıldız Genom Enstitüsü, Duke-NUS Tıp Okulu ve Ulusal Sinirbilim Enstitüsü'nden araştırmacılardan oluşan bir ekip, kendilerinin, insan beyninde bulunan ve Parkinson hastalığının gelişimiyle yakından bağlantılı, koyu renkli bir pigment olan nöromelanin içeren ilk ekip olduğunu söylüyor.
It also contains specialised neurons that produce dopamine, a neurotransmitter involved with motor control as low levels of dopamine lead to slowed reactions and disorders like Parkinson’s. 
      Ayrıca düşük dopamin seviyeleri yavaşlamış reaksiyonlara ve Parkinson gibi bozukluklara yol açtığından, motor kontrolüyle ilgili bir nörotransmitter olan dopamin üreten özel nöronlar da içerir.
Shawn Je, the lead researcher of the team, says that their mini-brain organoids mimic human midbrain development and that now they can really test how these mini brains react to existing or newly developed drugs before treating patients. 
      Ekibin baş araştırmacısı Shawn Je, mini beyin organoidlerinin insan orta beyin gelişimini taklit ettiğini ve artık hastaları tedavi etmeden önce bu mini beyinlerin mevcut veya yeni geliştirilen ilaçlara nasıl tepki vereceğini gerçekten test edebileceklerini söylüyor.
This will be a game changer for future drug development.    
      Bu, gelecekteki ilaç geliştirme açısından ezber bozan bir gelişme olacaktır.

32. e
According to the passage, mini human brains may help cure Parkinson’s disease since ----.
    researchers from various institutes worked together to develop them                          çeşitli enstitülerden araştırmacılar bunları geliştirmek için birlikte çalıştı
    newly produced and available drugs for Parkinson’s have been tested on them                  Parkinson için yeni üretilen ve mevcut ilaçlar bunlar üzerinde denendi
    they have already worked really well on other age-related brain conditions                   yaşa bağlı diğer beyin rahatsızlıkları üzerinde zaten çok iyi çalıştılar
    they are organoids grown from stem cells with high levels of dopamine                        yüksek düzeyde dopamin içeren kök hücrelerden yetiştirilen organoidlerdir
    they are like a simulation of our midbrains, which control some of our senses and movement   bazı duyularımızı ve hareketlerimizi kontrol eden orta beynimizin simülasyonu gibidirler
            since - çünkü


33. a
According to the passage, which of the following is true?          paragrafta cümle araması yapılır....
    Low levels of dopamine can be related to some other disorders along with Parkinson’s disease.              Düşük dopamin seviyeleri Parkinson hastalığının yanı sıra diğer bazı bozukluklarla da ilişkili olabilir.
    The presence of neuromelanin can help people with Parkinson's disease to recover from the condition.       Nöromelanin varlığı, Parkinson hastalığı olan kişilerin bu durumdan kurtulmasına yardımcı olabilir.
    Neuromelanin and dopamine are essential components to produce artificial organs.                           Nöromelanin ve dopamin yapay organlar üretmek için gerekli bileşenlerdir.
    Compared to dopamine, neuromelanin can produce more neurotransmitters that enable motor control.           Dopaminle karşılaştırıldığında nöromelanin, motor kontrolü sağlayan daha fazla nörotransmitter üretebilir.
    Neuromelanin and dopamine cause deterioration in our midbrain, leading to impairment in our reactions.     Nöromelanin ve dopamin orta beynimizde bozulmaya neden olarak reaksiyonlarımızın bozulmasına yol açar.


34. d
What is the author’s primary purpose in this passage?      primary - ana
    To explain why other researchers have failed to produce mini brains with neuromelanin
    To inform us about the development of Parkinson’s disease and other brain conditions
    To illustrate the reasons behind the failure of treatments for Parkinson’s disease                        Parkinson hastalığına yönelik tedavilerin başarısızlığının ardındaki nedenleri göstermek
    To announce a new scientific breakthrough that can aid the treatment of age-related brain conditions      Yaşa bağlı beyin rahatsızlıklarının tedavisine yardımcı olabilecek yeni bir bilimsel buluşu duyurmak
    To emphasise the importance of collaboration among researchers from various institutes





35. - 37. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
35. d
The Zapotec are a group of American Indians who live in the state of Oaxaca in southern Mexico. 
The Zapotec have lived in what is now known as Oaxaca since about 1500 BCE. 
In around 500 BCE, they built their capital city known as Monte Alban. 
This city had flat, step-style pyramids, temples, and very elaborate and ornate
tombs. Like the Zapotec people of today, the early Zapotec people were farmers. They also made fine pottery. 
In addition to this, they carved writing onto slabs of stone. 
This was one of the earliest forms of writing in the Americas. 
Zapotec lands once stretched from what is now Puebla – the state north of Oaxaca – to the Pacific Ocean. 
But after around 500 AD, Monte Alban started to fall into ruin, and a people called the Mixtec took over the city. 
The Zapotec started to form a number of small kingdoms, but these were conquered by the
Spanish when they took over the region in the 1500s.

What is true about the Zapotec people of today?
    They still carve their writing onto slabs of stone.
    They have migrated out of the Oaxaca region towards Puebla.
    They continue to live in Monte Alban to this day.
    They rely on farming just like their ancestors.
    They are mostly of Spanish descent.




36. 
According to the passage, the Zapotec people ----.
    used to control a large region of land, but then something happened which caused them to abandon their capital and create smaller regions
    were never a successful group of people and mainly stayed in their capital until they were conquered by the Spanish
    were migratory people who moved between Puebla and Oaxaca looking for fertile land for farming
    preferred to make pottery and farm rather than protect their land, which is why they were conquered by the Spanish
    allied themselves with the Mixtec people to control Monte Alban and protect themselves against the Spanish

37.
The main purpose of this passage is to ----.
    explain why the Zapotec no longer exist today
    discuss the reasons why Monte Alban was an important capital
    give some brief information about the Zapotec people
    talk about why the Zapotec were so successful in the past
    contrast the Zapotec of the past with present-day Zapotec people



38. - 40. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.

Many cultures regard dreams as having great significance for the dreamer, either by revealing something important about the dreamer’s present circumstances or predicting his or her future. 
The Austrian psychologist Sigmund Freud analysed the dreams of his patients to understand their unconscious needs and desires, and psychotherapists still make use of this technique today. 
Freud believed that the primary function of dreams was to wish fulfillment, or the idea that dreaming allows us to act out the desires that we must repress during the day. 
Although Freud focused on the meaning of dreams, other theories about the causes of dreams are less concerned with their content. 
One possibility is that we dream primarily to help with consolidation, or the moving of information into long-term memory. 
Rauchs and Desgranges found that rats that had been deprived of REM sleep, the sleep stage in which dreaming occurs, after learning a new task were less able to perform the task again than rats
  that had been allowed to dream, and these differences were greater on tasks that involved learning unusual information or developing new behaviours.

38.
It can be understood from the passage that Freud believed that dreams ----.
    could help one recall past memories with more accuracy
    contributed to the prediction of patients' wishes more than their desires
    were about wishes people had to suppress while they were awake
    that occurred during REM sleep were easily interpreted
    should be examined for the reasons behind them rather than for their content

39.
What can be concluded from Rauchs and Desgranges’s studies?
      They focused their studies more on the use of information in dreams of rats.
      They found that rats were only able to learn a new task during REM sleep.
      They discovered that when rats learned a new task, dreaming helped them successfully recall the new task later on.
      They showed the differences between rats that learned common information and those that learned unusual information.
      They found that dreaming resulted in poor performance in different tasks in rats.

40.
The main purpose of this passage is to ----.
      inform readers about the effects of dreaming
      encourage readers to analyse their dreams
      explain the Freudian approach to dream analysis
      give information about different theories of dreams
      refute critical theories about the functions of dreaming


41. - 43. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.

Occupational therapy is a branch of medical care aiming to improve the quality of life of patients through occupational pursuits – helping them overcome disabilities resulting from illness, injury or age so that
they can carry out the activities they need to perform in order to lead healthy and fulfilling lives. 
This means both giving them the means and mobility to pursue occupations, and selecting activities that are therapeutic to their particular condition. 
For example, a patient learning to get around in a wheelchair might need
structural changes to their environment such as widening of doorways and fitting of ramps as well as a programme of physical exercise to build strength in their arms and shoulders. 
Another patient, who has suffered a stroke, might be encouraged to try arts and crafts as a way to rebuild their manual dexterity skills. 
Occupational therapy has a long history, dating back to the 1st century BCE and the physicians of Ancient Greece. 
Today, it is still applied as an effective method of medical care.

According to the passage, the purpose of occupational therapy is to ----.
      help patients overcome certain physical issues so that they can lead better lives
      motivate patients so that they can accept their particular condition
      provide special treatment for patients who suffer from job-related illnesses
      improve the quality of therapies by encouraging patients to work harder
      enable patients to overcome their fear of getting involved in public life


According to the passage, occupational therapy supports patients by ----.
    choosing therapeutic activities that are designed to meet their specific needs
    providing them with the wheelchairs they need to be able to move
    helping them become physically strong enough to deal with arts and crafts
    preventing them from focusing on their disabilities with the use of certain medication
    ensuring their participation in outdoor activities on a regular basis

It is understood from the passage that occupational therapy ----.
    underestimates the importance of providing psychological support
    has been used as a method of treatment for a long period of time
    combines techniques from different medical fields to help patients
    is effective only when it is given together with medication
    has evolved dramatically since the time of Ancient Greece



Kevin:  Have you heard what famous footballer David Beckham says is his greatest achievement?
Richard:  ----
Kevin:  Actually, no. He says his greatest achievement has been always putting his family first. 
      He even makes breakfast every day for his kids.
Richard: That’s really unexpected from someone like him. I always thought celebrities only cared about themselves.
         Let me guess! He must’ve said something about his career playing for several well-known clubs.
        How would I know? I’ve never met a celebrity in my life!
        That’s easy. Celebrities always say they put their loved ones and friends first.
        That’s a really tricky question. He’s had such a successful career that anything could be considered great!
        In my opinion, the real achievement is what you do for others in your daily life.

44. - 48. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi bulunuz.



Interviewer: Many people believe that our personal information is quite safe if we have no apps on our phones.
             How true is that?
Tech Expert: Well, that depends. There's new software available that can collect information about you simply by using your Wifi connection.
Interviewer: ----
Tech Expert: By using this software, I can see which Wifi networks you've connected to before, I can predict your financial status, and I can also figure out where you live and work.

    What do you think is safe about this software?
    What kind of information could you possibly learn through Wifi connection?
    How can I protect my personal information from this type of software?
    What would be the best way to detect such threats?
    Are there any other ways to get information about people in addition to Wifi connection?



Jane:
 Do you think there could be another planet in the Solar System other than the ones we already know?
Ronald:
 Why not? But even if one exists, it must be quite distant from the Sun.
Jane:
 ----
Ronald:
 Oh, don’t worry. If one’s out there, they’ll find it!
Science has been improving faster than we may think.
Astronomers are going to start analysing the movements of objects in the Solar System soon.
Do you think that scientists will ever be able to find another one?
I hope people will be able to travel across the universe in the future.
Will people ever believe that there could be life on other planets?
What if it was not that far from the Sun or our planet?




Teacher:  Have you ever read a book by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle?
Student:  Yes. I’ve just finished reading The Return of Sherlock Holmes.
Teacher:  ----
Student:  Because it’s the collected short-story adventures published after the Great Detective’s return from the dead.
        Can you tell us what you really liked about the book?
        Why do you think the book is called so?Do you know why the first one was titled Sherlock Holmes?
        Why does the writer have a collection of stories?Why is Sherlock Holmes so famous in fiction?



Adam:   I don't understand how meditation has become so popular and is practised everywhere from hospitals to schools.
Jennifer:  ----
Adam:  Yeah, you're right, all you need is a comfortable posture and wish for self-transformation and desire for others' well-being.
Jennifer:  Of course the beneficial psychological effects can also be the reason.

It may be because it is derived from various branches of Buddhism.
Because scientists proved that its practitioners are less prone to stress.
I think it’s very easy to practise, I mean no equipment and workout is needed.
You know, meditation also leads to some physiological changes in the brain.
Especially three types that developed through Buddhism are very commonly practised.



E)As shown in a study in which young adults became better sleepers after three weeks of listening to
classical music at bedtime, music can have a profound effect on our lives.A study has found out that listening to classical
music at bedtime for three weeks helped young adults sleep better, demonstrating how strongly music affects our lives.
According to the results of a study, young adults should listen to classical music at bedtime for three weeks to increase their sleep quality since music has a deep effect on our lives.As proven in a three-week study, bedtime classical
music has a significant effect on our lives, particularly helping young adults improve their sleep quality.Thanks to the profound effect of classical music,
young adults were able to become better sleepers at the end of a study after listening to it at bedtime for three weeks.
Music can impact our lives to a great extent, as young adults who listened to classical music regularly at bedtime in a study were able to sleep better for three weeks.

49. - 53. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en yakın cümleyi bulunuz.

Though dynasties changed over the thousands of years of Chinese history, many of the elements of Chinese life remained the same.
If dynasties had not changed over the thousands of years of Chinese history, all of the elements of
Chinese life could have stayed the same.Many elements of Chinese life hardly succeeded to continue, while dynasties changed over the thousands of years of Chinese history.
Chinese history witnessed many changing dynasties over thousands of years, yet many of the elements were preserved in Chinese life.
Some elements of Chinese life succeeded in staying the same; 
however, changing dynasties of Chinese history over the thousands of years could have prevented this.
Due to the changing dynasties over the thousands of years of China’s history, only a few elements of Chinese life faced much change.




Materials found under water are preserved differently from materials found on land, so underwater archaeologists must know how to handle them without destroying the valuable information they reveal.
Underwater archaeologists have to know how to deal with objects found under water and the ones found on
land as they can be easily harmed if they do not pay enough attention to them.
Not to give harm to the precious information they will provide, underwater archaeologists have to preserve objects found under water carefully because they are maintained differently from the ones found on land.
It is very difficult to protect the objects found under water because, unlike the ones found on land, they can be harmed easily, so underwater archaeologists cannot get enough information.Knowing how to get enough information from them, underwater archaeologists show a great deal of effort not to cause harm to the objects found under water which are different from the ones found on land.
Underwater archaeologists have to know how to deal with objects found under water without damaging the precious information they provide because the way they are kept is different from those found on land.





Achieving mutual understanding is not a trivial skill because most people are not taught how to communicate effectively.
As most people are not educated in effective communication, mutual understanding is an important trait to possess.
Effective communication can only be acquired when people are educated, as it is considered by many people an important skill for mutual understanding.
Most people still think that mutual understanding is an insignificant trait even if they are taught how to communicate effectively.
Effective communication is the key to achieving mutual understanding, but a great number of people need some training on it.
It is a good idea to teach people how to communicate effectively because they are usually not good at demonstrating mutual understanding.
Car makers are looking for ways of reusing metal and plastic parts instead of throwing them away when a car is scrapped.
It is essential for car manufacturers to make use of metal and plastic parts from old cars before their total removal.
Metal and plastic parts from unused cars should be taken advantage of, according to car manufacturers.
Before cars are disposed of, all their parts, whether metal or plastic, can be re-used by car manufacturers in many ways.
Utilisation of metal and plastic parts without wasting them when a car is discarded is what car manufacturers are attempting to achieve.
What makes recycling significant for car manufacturers is that most car parts, including metal and plastic ones, are used again.


Your friends have invited you to a concert; however, you have already made plans with your grandmother to go shopping for an upcoming special occasion.
So, you tactfully decline their offer by saying: ----Sure, as soon as I finish shopping with my grandmother, I’ll be at the concert hall. See you all there!
Thanks for the invitation guys, but I’ve promised my grandma that I’d help out with some shopping as we have a party coming up.I’d rather spend the day with my grandmother shopping than go see a concert with you. 
It just doesn’t sound fun to me.
I’m afraid I’ll have to pass. I’ve promised my grandma that we’d hang out together and then see a concert.
I can’t believe my favourite singer is in town. 
Can I also bring my grandma to the concert?Your friend is going to run in a marathon but is
doubtful if she can complete the race because she has recently been ill. 
Now that she is feeling better, you want to encourage her before she runs the race, so you say: ----Good luck, running in a marathon is difficult and now it will be even more challenging.
Is this a good idea? Some runners can become ill when running such a long distance.
You’ve worked hard to be in this marathon, and I’m sure you’ll do great from start to finish.
Why don’t you consider running in next year’s marathon, instead? 
I’m sure you can do it then.You don't have the courage to run a marathon because you’re disadvantaged from the start.

54. - 58. sorularda, verilen durumda söylenmiş olabilecek sözü bulunuz.


One of your friends has asked you to check his
project work before submitting it, but because of
your own commitments, you lack the time to do it.
You want to let him know about the situation
without offending him, so you say: ----I wish you had given it to me days before. How can
you expect me to do it in such a short time? You know
I’m busy.Why don’t you ask another friend for help? I wish I
could help you, but I’m clueless about the content of
the project.I really would like to help you but I’m really very busy. I
wish I had enough time. I’m very sorry.I’m sorry, I suppose you’d better do it yourself, it’s your
own responsibility. I can’t spare any time.Do you think it’d be better if you asked your teacher to
change the deadline? Otherwise, it won’t be possible
to finish it.You are walking on a crowded street when suddenly
you bump into a woman carrying several grocery
bags and cause her to drop her groceries all over
the ground. You feel terrible for the accident and say
to her: ----Hey lady! Watch where you’re going!Excuse me? Why would I help with those?Sorry, but that shop should offer higher quality grocery
bags so accidents like this won’t happen.I guess if we were both paying attention this would
have never happened.I’m so sorry! Here, let me help you with your things.
56.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
57.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)You go to a restaurant for lunch and pay with your
credit card. When you check your bank statement
later on, you realise the cashier has charged you
more than your actual bill. So you call the restaurant
and ask politely: ----Your waiter charged me more than the amount of
my bill. Put yourself in my shoes, can you imagine
my frustration?I’ve just realised that I paid more than the bill by
mistake. Have you ever thought about firing your
overcharging cashier?I think there’s been a mistake with my bill. Would it be
possible to correct it and give me a refund?I’m busy with too many things at the moment and now
look what you’ve made me deal with. Can you send
my refund with one of your waiters?I don’t remember his name, but the waiter gave me the
wrong bill. Can you check what’s going on?
58.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
17
2019-YDT/İNGA scientist at Japan’s Osaka University built a
robot for one purpose: to pretend to listen to you.
When two or more are placed together, they will
simulate people having a conversation. If a human
attempts to join in, the robots will smile, nod, and
respond to comments by saying things like "I see"
or "interesting point". They will not actually
understand what has been said, but will appear to.
---- But the motivation behind the robot was to try
and model the subtle body language and polite
niceties that are so important to conversation.This is, of course, an entirely pointless achievement.Robots that seem more ‘human’ and less intimidating
are being built.Equally important for roboticists is an understanding of
human psychology.The team hope to make robots with more realistic
behaviours.There must be a balance between the psychological
and the scientific when building a robot.
59. - 63. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada
anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek
cümleyi bulunuz.
59.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Forests, conserved land, and natural habitats are
not important just for the sake of saving trees and
animals. Forests and all greenery are important in
keeping the climate in check. Plants take in the
carbon in the atmosphere and give back oxygen,
and older trees hold on to that carbon, storing it for
the duration of their lives. By taking in carbon
dioxide, they are reducing the greenhouse effect.
---- And now, deforestation is responsible for about
a quarter of greenhouse gas emissions.In other words, greenhouse gases trap heat in the
Earth’s atmosphere, which increases global average
temperature.Unfortunately, many of the world’s forests have been
cut down to make way for farmland, highways, and
cities.Yet, some countries have chosen sustainable
development plans instead of economic plans that
would produce greenhouse gases.In fact, it is not only the trees and oceans that store
carbon, soil does, too, and by exposing the carbon to
the oxygen in the air, it helps to produce carbon
dioxide.Although the soil on a treeless hillside washes away in
a mudslide, a tree-covered hillside’s soil stays put.
60.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
18
2019-YDT/İNGChildren’s furniture stresses the social position of
the child in relation to both the environment and to
adults. ---- The very existence of children’s furniture
promotes the child’s position because it is the
property of the child and it also physically occupies
space – a choice that excludes other furniture and
reflects a priority, stressing the child’s social
importance. If a child has a piece of furniture of his
or her own, this acknowledges the status and rank
of the child. The special form of children’s furniture
signals that childhood is considered an important
period.Furniture made especially for children is not a modern
phenomenon but has existed independent of the ways
in which adult views of children have changed.Having an individual piece of furniture for children
indicates the child's status and the right to status in
society.Children’s furniture has historically been defined not
just by scale but also by aesthetic purposes.The design of children’s furniture is influenced by
period, material, form, function, pedagogical views,
and children’s games and status.Of the children’s furniture that has survived from
earlier periods, chairs tend to show the most variety.
61.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Following the last Ice Age, humans had to adapt
their diet and ways of life. While mobility was usual,
in favourable areas with exceptional resources,
communities could become settled.
Hunter-gatherers used a wide variety of foods.
---- For example, herd animals moved between
summer upland and winter lowland pastures, marine
fish and birds migrated seasonally, and woodlands
produced autumn fruits and spring bulbs. However,
other food sources, such as shellfish, small
mammals, and freshwater fish, could be found all
year round.Bones and shells recovered from archaeological sites
are the most obvious remains of what
hunter-gatherers ate.In some favoured regions, early humans could remain
in one location with abundant resources.Hunter-gatherers in warmer areas often hunted
gazelle, the most common mammal in the region.In most regions, some foods were available in different
places at certain times of year.Hunter-gatherers selected environments offering a
diversity of food sources, such as lakes, rivers and
coasts.
62.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
19
2019-YDT/İNGCaffeine is a bitter substance found in the beans,
leaves, and fruits of plants, where it acts as a
natural pesticide. It is found in a wide variety of
products, including coffee, tea, soft drinks, candy,
and desserts. Caffeine acts as a mood enhancer and
provides energy. ---- When heavy coffee
drinkers reduce their caffeine intake, for example,
they often report being irritable, restless, and
drowsy, as well as experiencing strong headaches,
and these symptoms may last up to a week.While most experts feel that consuming small amounts
of caffeine during pregnancy is safe, larger amounts of
caffeine can be harmful to the foetus.It causes accelerated heart and breathing rates, and
increases in blood sugar accompanied by decreases
in appetite, thus it is used to stay awake and control
weight.There are many mixed messages about caffeine in the
media, and it can be difficult to find information that
relates to you.Although food authorities list caffeine as a safe food
substance, it has at least some characteristics of an
addictive substance.For those who love and appreciate the flavour of
good coffee, but would like to reduce their caffeine
intake, there are options.
63.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)By looking at what you click and the pages you like,
some social media companies can infer your
preferences, then use this information to target you
with adverts.Bazı sosyal medya şirketleri, tıkladığınız şeylere ve
beğendiğiniz sayfalara bakabilir ve böylelikle
tercihlerinizle ilgili sonuçlara ulaşarak size reklam
gönderebilir.Bazı sosyal medya şirketleri, tıkladığınız şeylere ve
beğendiğiniz sayfalara bakarak tercihlerinizle ilgili
sonuçlara ulaşabilir, sonra da bu bilgiyi size reklam
göndermek için kullanabilir.Sizi reklama boğmak amacıyla bazı sosyal medya
şirketleri, tercihlerinizle ilgili bilgilere ulaşmak için
tıkladığınız şeylere ve beğendiğiniz sayfalara
bakmaktadır.Tercihlerinizle ilgili sonuçlara ulaşmak amacıyla bazı
sosyal medya şirketleri tıkladığınız şeylere ve
beğendiğiniz sayfalara reklam gönderebilir.Bazı sosyal medya şirketlerinin tıkladığınız şeylere ve
beğendiğiniz sayfalara bakarak tercihlerinizle ilgili
sonuçlara ulaşmak istemelerinin sebebi, size reklam
göndermektir.
64. - 69. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi bulunuz.



The Internet has developed so rapidly since the 1990s that today we can capture and transmit
information at a speed that could have seemed impossible 50 years ago.İnternet, 1990'lardan beri çok hızlı geliştiği için bugün
bilgiyi elde etme ve dağıtma hızımız 50 yıl önce imkânsız gibi görünüyordu.İnternet'in 1990'lardan bu yana hızla gelişmesiyle
birlikte bugün bilgiyi 50 yıl önce imkânsız görünen bir
hızda elde ediyor ve dağıtıyoruz.İnternet 1990’lardan beri o kadar hızlı gelişti ki
bugün bilgiyi 50 yıl önce bize imkânsız görünebilecek bir hızda elde edebiliyor ve
dağıtabiliyoruz.Bugün bilgiyi 50 yıl önce imkânsız görünen bir hızda
elde edebiliyor ve dağıtabiliyoruz, çünkü İnternet son
50 yılda çok hızlı gelişti.İnternet, 1990'lardan beri o kadar hızlı gelişti ki,
bugünün hızında bilgi elde etmek ve dağıtmak
muhtemelen 50 yıl önce imkânsız olarak görünürdü.Not only were the Mayas sophisticated astronomers,
but they also developed a system for mathematics that included the concept of zero.
Mayalar sadece bilgili gök bilimciler değillerdi, aynı zamanda matematik için sıfır kavramını da içeren bir
sistem geliştirmişlerdi.Matematik için gelişmiş bir sistemin yanı sıra sıfır
kavramını da bulan Mayalar oldukça bilgili gök bilimcilerdi.
Mayalar sıfır kavramı ve matematik sistemi gibi yeni gelişmelere imza atmışlardı çünkü gök bilimi onların
tek uzmanlık alanı değildi.Deneyimli gök bilimci ve matematikçi olan Mayalar,
sıfır kavramı ile birlikte gelişmiş bir matematik sistemi
bulmuş oldular.Gök bilimci de olan Mayalar tarafından yalnızca sıfır
kavramı değil aynı zamanda matematiksel bir sistem de geliştirilmiştir.


E)Diseases that affect the organs of the digestive system, such as the stomach, pancreas, and liver,
are caused by alcoholic drinks, poor nutrition, or
bacteria that break down the layers of tissue and
harm the organs.Sindirim sistemi organları olan karaciğer, pankreas ve
mide; organların doku katmanlarına zarar veren alkollü
içecekler, kötü beslenme ve bakteri kaynaklı
hastalıklardan etkilenmektedir.Doku katmanlarını bozan ve organlara zarar veren
alkollü içecekler, kötü beslenme ve bakteriler;
karaciğer, pankreas ve mide gibi sindirim sistemi
organlarının hastalıklardan etkilenmesine neden
olmaktadır.Karaciğer, pankreas ve mide gibi sindirim sistemi
organlarını etkileyen hastalıklar; alkollü içecekler, kötü
beslenme ya da doku katmanlarını bozan ve organlara
zarar veren bakterilerden kaynaklanır.Doku katmanlarını bozan ve organlara zarar veren
bakteriler, alkollü içecekler ve kötü beslenme;
karaciğer, pankreas ve mide gibi sindirim sistemi
organlarına zarar veren hastalıkların nedenidir.Mide, pankreas ve karaciğeri etkileyen hastalıklar;
alkollü içecekler, kötü beslenme ya da sindirim
sistemindeki doku katmanlarını bozarak organlara
zarar veren bakteriler nedeniyle ortaya çıkmaktadır.
67.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
21
2019-YDT/İNGLeopardus guigna, one of the world’s smallest wild
cats, is on the road to extinction due to the change
in the way farms are run.Çiftliklerin işletilme şeklindeki değişiklik, dünyanın en
küçük vahşi kedilerinden biri olan Leopardus
guigna'nın yok olmasına sebep olmaktadır.Dünyanın en küçük vahşi kedilerinden biri olan
Leopardus guigna, çiftliklerin işletilme şeklindeki
değişiklik yüzünden yok olma yolundadır.Leopardus guigna, çiftliklerin işletilme şeklindeki
değişikliğin bir sonucu olarak yok olması muhtemel en
küçük vahşi kedilerden biridir.Leopardus guigna'nın da aralarında olduğu dünyanın
en küçük vahşi kedileri, çiftliklerin işletilme şeklindeki
değişiklikten dolayı yok olmak üzeredir.Çiftliklerin işletilme şekli değiştiği için dünyanın en
küçük vahşi kedilerinden olan Leopardus guigna
neredeyse yok olma noktasına gelmiştir.
68.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)The first civilisation in the Aegean world emerged
with the settlement of people on the island of Crete
in 6000 BCE, but the island reached the height of its
power between the years of 2200 and 1450 BCE.Ege coğrafyasının ilk medeniyeti, MÖ 6000 yılında
insanların Girit Adası'na yerleşmesiyle birlikte
zenginleşmiş olsa da gücünün zirvesine ancak MÖ
2200 ve 1450 yılları arasında ulaşmıştır.İnsanlar, Girit Adası'na MÖ 6000 yılında yerleşmeye
başladığında ada, hâlihazırda Ege coğrafyasının
önemli bir medeniyetiydi ama gücünün zirvesine
ulaşması MÖ 2200 ve 1450 yıllarını bulmuştu.Ege coğrafyasındaki ilk medeniyet, insanların
MÖ 6000 yılında Girit Adası'na yerleşmesi ile ortaya
çıkmış fakat ada, gücünün zirvesine MÖ 2200 ve 1450
yılları arasında ulaşmıştır.Dünyadaki ilk Ege medeniyeti MÖ 6000 yılında Girit
Adası'na olan yerleşimle oluşmuştur ancak ada, en iyi
zamanlarını MÖ 2200 ve 1450 yılları arasında
yaşamıştır.Dünyadaki ilk Ege medeniyeti, insanların MÖ 6000
yılında Girit Adası'na yerleşmesinin ardından
gelişmeye başlamıştır ancak MÖ 2200 ve 1450 yılları
arası adanın gücünün en çok arttığı zamanlardır.



Böbreklerimizin kaldırabileceğinden daha fazla su tüketirsek, kanımızdaki sodyum ve diğer elektrolitlerin yoğunluğu azalmaya başlar ve belirli bir noktadan sonra hücrelerimiz kontrolsüz bir şekilde su emer.
Even if more water than our kidneys can tolerate is consumed, the concentration of sodium and other electrolytes in our blood can begin to drop and beyond
a certain point, our cells uncontrollably absorb this water.
When we consume more water than our kidneys can tolerate, the concentration of sodium and other
electrolytes in our blood drops and beyond a certain point, excessive water will be absorbed uncontrollably by our cells.
Consuming more water than our kidneys can tolerate will decrease the concentration of sodium and other electrolytes in our blood and beyond a certain point, our cells will uncontrollably absorb water.
If we consume more water than our kidneys can tolerate, the concentration of sodium and other
electrolytes in our blood begins to drop and beyond a certain point, our cells uncontrollably absorb water.The concentration of sodium and other electrolytes in
our blood begins to drop and beyond a certain point, our cells will uncontrollably absorb water when more water than our kidneys can tolerate is consumed.

70. - 75. sorularda, verilen Türkçe cümleye anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz.
Düşen doğum oranları ve yaşlanan nüfus sonucunda, bazı zengin ülkeler küçülecek ve daha
az etkili olacaktır.Some rich countries with falling birth rates and aging
population will get smaller and less influential as a
result.As a result of falling birth rates and aging population,
some rich countries will become smaller and less
effective.Decreasing birth rates and aging population are the
reason why some rich countries are getting smaller
and less efficient.Falling birth rates and aging population will eventually
cause some of the rich countries to become smaller
and less effective.Getting smaller and less influential is the consequence
of decreasing birth rates and aging population in some
rich countries.Beynin sol ve sağ tarafları birbirine eşit
olmadığından, bir kimsenin fiziksel ve zihinsel
işlerde her iki elini ya da ayağını eşit derecede iyi
kullanabilmesi oldukça nadirdir.




It is very rare for someone to be able to use both
hands or feet equally well in physical and mental tasks since the left and right sides of the brain are not equal to each other.Some people can hardly use both hands or feet equally well in physical and mental tasks because the left and right sides of the brain may not be equal to each other.Since the left and right sides of the brain are not equal
to each other, physical and mental tasks make it impossible for some people to be able to use both hands or feet equally well.For some, using both hands or feet equally well is very
rare in physical and mental tasks even if the left side of the brain is equal to the right side.In physical and mental tasks, both hands or feet may
not be used equally well by some people if the left and right sides of the brain are not equal to each other.




İnci üretmek, istiridyenin bir parazitten ya da yaralanmadan korunması için tasarlanmış bir bağışıklık sistemi tepkisidir.
  Making pearls is an immune system response designed to protect the oyster from a parasite or an injury.
  An oyster protects itself from a parasite or an injury by making pearls, which is a response designed by the immune system.
  Designed as an immune system response, making pearls protects oysters from a parasite or an injury.
  By producing pearls, an oyster gives a response designed to protect its immune system from a parasite or an injury.
  An oyster produces pearls to protect itself from a parasite or an injury because it is a response designed by the immune system.


Birçoğumuz için mutluluk arayışı hayatta önemli bir amaçtır ancak mutluluğun ne olduğunu anlamak için olumsuz tecrübelere ihtiyacımız vardır çünkü bunlar hayatımıza anlam katar.
  For many of us seeking happiness is an important goal in life, but we need the negative experiences to understand what happiness is because they give meaning to our lives.
  Many of us seek happiness, which is an important goal in life, but we need the negative experiences that give meaning to our lives to understand what happiness is.
  The negative experiences give meaning to our lives so we need them to understand what happiness is because for many of us seeking happiness is an important goal in life.
  For most of us happiness is an important goal in life, so we look for it, but we need the negative experiences because they give meaning to our lives and make us understand what happiness is.
  Many of us seek happiness as it is an important goal in life, but we need the negative experiences to understand what happiness is because they give meaning to our lives.


E)Ödev, sadece öğrencilerin hayatlarının rutin bir yanı değil, aynı zamanda okul ve aile arasındaki temel günlük etkileşimdir.
  As being the key daily interaction between school and family, homework is a routine aspect of not only students' but also their families’ lives.
  Homework is not just a routine aspect of students' lives, but it constitutes one of the key daily interactions between school and family as well.
  Homework is regarded as being both a routine aspect of students' lives and the key daily interaction between school and family.
  Homework is not only a routine aspect of students' lives, but also the key daily interaction between school and family.
  Homework can be considered to be a routine aspect of students' lives as well as the key daily interaction between school and family.


(I) Each Sumerian city-state had fine public buildings, markets, workshops, and water systems. 
(II) There was a royal palace and a ziggurat, on top of which was a shrine dedicated to the god of that city. 
(III) Scribes and accountants were also important, and involved in all aspects of Sumerian daily life. 
(IV) Around the public buildings were houses of local people. 
(V) Beyond these lay the farmers’ field and the marshlands of the Mesopotamian rivers.


(I) Humans need social interaction, so depriving them of social contact, like when prisoners are sent to solitary confinement, is recognised by psychologists as a form of torture. 
(II) On the other hand, too much social interaction can be tiring; engaging with someone is a lot of work for the brain. 
(III) This explains the apparent contradiction between humans needing social interaction, but also needing privacy. 
(IV) The social brain hypothesis, first put forward in the 90s, suggests that our sociable nature is why we have such developed brains. 
(V) Social interaction wears our brain out, so we need privacy to get away for a bit and recharge.


76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan cümleyi bulunuz.

(I) An elephant has a very large brain for its size and the ‘temporal lobe’ region responsible for memory is more developed. 
(II) The fascination with elephant memory has only been around for the last 200 years or so.
(III) This results in powerful abilities to ‘download’ important survival data such as where to find food and water, and who is friend or foe. 
(IV) The matriarch of a herd may recognise over 200 individual elephants and can react to the call of a deceased member of her herd two years after their death. 
(V) During droughts, these grandma elephants lead family members to waterholes by recalling detailed maps they have made spanning hundreds of kilometres.


(I) One essential requirement of healthy nourishment is that a meal must be complete. 
(II) In other words, it must supply all types of nutrients, those used for structural purposes (protein), those used for energy purposes (carbohydrates and fats), and those used for regulatory functions (minerals and vitamins). 
(III) Only consuming a variety of products from different food groups will guarantee the supply of diverse nutrients that the body needs. 
(IV) One should not take up even a standard diet without consulting with a doctor. 
(V) That is to say, only a varied diet containing different types of food can provide the body with the range of nutrients that it requires.


(I) The ninja emerged in Japan in the mid-15th century as a class of specially trained warriors. 
(II) The ninja have typically been seen as the antithesis of the honourable samurai, but the relationship is in fact much more complicated. 
(III) They spent their entire lives improving the skills, disciplines and abilities they needed to become masters of ninjutsu. 
(IV) Training began at a very early age and like samurai, they began almost as soon as they could walk, learning how to fight with a vast array of weapons, from katanas, a long single-edged samurai sword, to throwing stars. 
(V) They were extremely fit and capable of impressive physical feats such as running for a long period of time, scaling castle walls, leaping great distances and fighting multiple opponents without weapons.


