https://app.box.com/s/r5jpbli7blwm20flbvmhqcxx6ih7m96q

1. - 8. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.
01. b
Although considering how someone may react to a situation can be worthwhile, making ---- about another person’s behaviour may lead you to the wrong conclusions.
promises
assumptions             assumption - farzetmek, varsayım
mistakes
priorities              priority - öncelik
compliments


02. d
By the time psychology came into its own as an ---- discipline after separating from philosophy, the scientific revolution was two centuries old.
offensive
artificial
inadequate - yetersiz, eşitsiz
independent
outdated                            outdated - tarihi geçmiş

03. a
----, the Universe was too energetic for stars to form, but as it expanded and cooled, it became possible for gravity to form clumps of gas.              ---- Evren yıldızların oluşması için fazla enerjikti, ancak genişledikçe ve soğudukça yerçekiminin gaz kümeleri oluşturması mümkün hale geldi.
Initially    başlangıçta, i̇lk olarak
Frankly      açıkçası, dobraca
Virtually    sanal olarak
Ultimately   nihayetinde
Merely       sadece


04. a
Mobile learning, the role of which in education is becoming quite important, is often applied outside classrooms to ---- the learning that takes place inside classrooms.
    enhance          enhance - iyileştirmek, geliştirmek
    insist           insist - ısrar etmek
    require          require - gerekmek, gerektirmek
    suspect          suspect - şüphelenmek
    provide          provide - sağlamak, temin etmek, ihtiyacı karşılamak


05. c
In wealthier parts of the world, heart disease and strokes ---- over a quarter of deaths and there are many factors at play, with conventional wisdom identifying cholesterol as one of the biggest offenders.
                                                                                                                             Kolesterolü en büyük suçlulardan biri olarak tanımlayan geleneksel görüşle.
    rest on          dinlenmek 
    go through
    account for      hesaba katmak, hesap vermek 
    bring down       yıkmak 
    stem from        kaynaklanmak



06. d
In the 19-mile exclusion zone surrounding the Chernobyl power plant in Ukraine, which ---- following the 1986 reactor meltdown, plants and animals ---- now in ways they never had before.
    used to be contaminated / thrive                                      gelişmek, serpilmek, dallanıp budaklanmak
    has been contaminated / will have been thriving
    would have been contaminated / have been thriving
    was contaminated / are thriving
    had been contaminated / were thriving



07. b
Scientists conducting research to shed light on the possible causes of several mental disorders ---- a link between lack of normal gut bacteria and brain development changes that ---- schizophrenia.
    had observed / used to cause
    have observed / could cause                        present perfect - etkisi devam ediyor
    will observe / should cause
    observed / should have caused
    are observing / had to cause

    conduct - yürütmek
    shed light - ışık tutmak



08. d
---- as the main shipping route between the Indian and Pacific Oceans, Singapore ---- traders from China, India, and Europe for years.
    To be served / had attracted                    passive
    Being served / would be attracting              passive
    To serve / will have been attracting            -mek için
    Serving / has been attracting                   active
    Served / was attracting                         passive


9. - 15. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

09.b
Recently, the genome of an archaic human female ---- a group called the Denisovans, who lived about 41,000 years ago, has been sequenced ---- a new method of DNA research.
    for / by
    from / with
    in / onto
    among / beyond
    towards / over
                          archaic - modası geçmiş eski
                          sequence - ard arda takip etmek



10.d
Kefir is a fermented drink similar ---- yoghurt and is valued ---- its beneficial effects on microbes in our gut.
    in / as
    with / about
    around / of
    to / for
    from / by

11.e
Computers may be able to beat us in specific activities; ----, it will be a long time before we see a robot with human-like versatility.          çok yönlülük - versatile - elinden her iş gelen
    moreover                dahası
    thus
    likewise                aynı şekilde            otherwise - diğer türlü
    instead
    however                 yine de, ancak



12.b
---- the wheel was invented, humans had devised various ways to move heavy objects around.
    As long as
    Before                  eylem önceliği - past perfect   - before, after, when
    Whenever
    In case
    Unless


13.b
Today, ---- language is completely isolated from ---- languages, which means there is a constant contact among all languages.
       any                                       a few
       no                                        other
       a                                         several
       all                                       many
       each                                      any
    any / a few
    no / other                other people - çoğul yapılabilir.
    a / several               birçok, birkaç
    all / many                çoğul
    each / any                


14.c
---- people you dine with, ---- food you are likely to eat because when dining with another person, people eat 35 percent more than when they are alone.
    Whether / or
    Not only / but also
    The more / the more
    Either / or
    Neither / nor
                    likely - büyük ihtamalle, galiba


15.a
Some students wrongly interpret failure as resulting from lack of ability ---- lack of effort, and do nothing about it ,since they believe that ability, unlike effort, is something they really cannot do much about.
                                                                                                                        çünkü
    rather than          - den ziyade
    similar to
    in case of           - durumunda
    in terms of          - açısından
    except for           - dışında, hariç


16. - 20. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

The Incas were among the ancient people that used to live in South America.
        İnkalar, Güney Amerika'da yaşayan eski halklar arasındaydı.
They used both conquest and peaceful assimilations to expand their empire (16)---- it became the largest in pre-Colombian America.
        İmparatorluklarını genişletmek için hem fetihleri ​​hem de barışçıl asimilasyonları kullandılar (16) ---- Kolombiya öncesi Amerika'nın en büyüğü oldu.
Expansion was remarkably rapid, starting in earnest in the reign of Pachacuti around 1438.
        Genişleme oldukça hızlıydı ve ciddi anlamda 1438 civarında Pachacuti döneminde başlamıştı.
Pachacuti and his son, Tupac Inca, created a huge federal system consisting of four provinces, each (17)---- by an Inca governor.
        Pachacuti ve oğlu Tupac Inca, her biri (17) ---- bir İnka valisi tarafından yönetilen dört eyaletten oluşan devasa bir federal sistem yarattı.
Following each new conquest, magnificent roads, many of which were paved, were built to link it to the capital of Cuzco and the rest of the empire.
        Her yeni fethin ardından, burayı başkent Cuzco'ya ve imparatorluğun geri kalanına bağlamak için çoğu asfaltlanmış muhteşem yollar inşa edildi.
With its high-quality building work, Machu Pichu is the best preserved (18)---- of the Inca civilisation.
        Yüksek kaliteli inşaat işçiliğiyle Machu Pichu, İnka uygarlığının en iyi korunmuş (18)----'sidir.
It is today a fine example of architecture and planning (19)---- being abandoned in the 16th century.
        Bugün mimari ve planlamanın güzel bir örneğidir (19)---- 16. yüzyılda terk edilmiştir.
The quality of the stonework, the high altitude of its position and the numerous temples that have been identified among its ruins seem to indicate that Machu Pichu was very important (20)---- the Inca people.
        Taş işçiliğinin kalitesi, konumunun yüksek olması ve kalıntıları arasında tespit edilen çok sayıda tapınak, Machu Pichu'nun İnka halkı için çok önemli (20)---- olduğunu gösteriyor gibi görünüyor.

16. e
    whether
    whenever
    unless
    if
    until

17. a
    overseen
    overseeing
    to have overseen
    oversee                  - denetlemek, yönetmek
    to oversee

18. b
    occupation
    settlement
    requirement
    destruction
    cultivation
19.a
    despite
    rather than
    in case of
    in addition to
    in terms of

20.d
    off
    from
    by
    for
    upon

21. - 28. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz.
21.a
Although classical music is claimed to improve children’s intelligence, ----.
    there may not be a correlation between intelligence and appreciation for classical music
    parents’ time is probably better spent exposing their children to classical music right after birth
    playing classical music to babies will inevitably make them grow up smarter
    parents may not overlook the possibility to enhance the cognitive ability of their children                                    overlook - gözden kaçırmak, görmezlikten gelmek, yüksekten bakmak
    it is usually enough for parents to rely on classical music alone for the cognitive development of their children              Ebeveynlerin çocuklarının bilişsel gelişimi için yalnızca klasik müziğe güvenmeleri genellikle yeterlidir.


22. a
Because people usually do not want to participate in surveys, ----.                because  - yüzünden, dolayı               survey - anket, inceleme
    some researchers offer participants a motivational reward to complete a survey
    a lot of companies rely on consumer surveys to improve their products
    in a typical research design, data collection is followed by data analysis
    data science is becoming more and more appealing to scientists and business people alike                    appealing - cazip
    surveys have long remained a popular tool for collecting information from people


23. c
When a prey animal or an unsuspecting human approaches, ----.
        Bir av hayvanı ya da şüphelendirmeyen bir insan yaklaştığında
    the box jellyfish is regarded as one of the most venomous creatures in the ocean
        kutu denizanası okyanustaki en zehirli canlılardan biri olarak kabul edilir
    the box jellyfish is found in coastal waters of northern Australia
        kutu denizanası kuzey Avustralya'nın kıyı sularında bulunur
    the cells of the box jellyfish are triggered instantly and they deliver toxins
        Kutu denizanasının hücreleri anında tetiklenir ve toksinleri dağıtırlar.
    the box jellyfish gets its name from its cube-shaped bell
        kutu denizanası adını küp şeklindeki çanından alıyor
    the venom of the box jellyfish is fatal to humans, affecting the nervous system
        Kutu denizanasının zehri insanlar için öldürücüdür ve sinir sistemini etkiler.

24.b
As the climate warmed and the human population grew and spread geographically, ----.                           İklim ısındıkça ve insan nüfusu coğrafi olarak büyüyüp yayıldıkça,
    walking upright on two feet has long been considered to be a human characteristic                          İki ayak üzerinde dik yürümenin uzun zamandır insani bir özellik olduğu düşünülüyor
    humans began to develop the first ‘civilised’ human settlements                                            insanlar ilk 'uygar' insan yerleşimlerini geliştirmeye başladı
    they needed to find ways to keep warm and dry                                                              sıcak ve kuru kalmanın yollarını bulmaları gerekiyordu
    we do not know when exactly humans started making clothes and footwear                                     İnsanların kıyafet ve ayakkabı yapmaya tam olarak ne zaman başladıklarını bilmiyoruz.
    the task of understanding the nature of early human life has been very difficult.                          İlk insan yaşamının doğasını anlama görevi çok zordu



25.b
The rearing of livestock has brought great wealth to Uruguay ----.                                            Hayvancılık Uruguay'a büyük zenginlik kazandırdı ----.
    even if it has been described as a giant city with many farms                                             birçok çiftliğin bulunduğu dev bir şehir olarak tanımlansa bile
    although recently tourism and banking have also contributed to the national income                        Her ne kadar son zamanlarda turizm ve bankacılık da milli gelire katkıda bulunmuş olsa da
    as the capital city of Montevideo is also the largest city with a population of around 1.5 million
    whereas the country exports animal products all over the world
    as long as the population of livestock outnumbers the human population

26.d
Obese people usually eat more than those of average weight, ----.
    but research shows that gaining weight can be almost as difficult as losing it
    thus, obese people may eat less food but get more calories
    therefore, individual variations in body metabolism allow some to burn calories faster
    yet they often believe that they eat less than others                                                      yine de sıklıkla diğerlerinden daha az yediklerine inanırlar
    because most overweight people perform less physical activity


27.e
----, the American Marshall Plan helped to jump-start the Austrian economy, laying the foundation for the country’s present-day prosperity.    ---- Amerikan Marshall Planı, Avusturya ekonomisinin yeniden canlanmasına yardımcı oldu ve ülkenin bugünkü refahının temelini attı.
    Regardless of the capital city Vienna’s humble origins as a Roman army camp on the Danube River                                            Başkent Viyana'nın Tuna Nehri üzerindeki bir Roma ordusu kampı olarak mütevazı kökenine bakılmaksızın
    As though its leaders had repeatedly requested international financial assistance                                                          Sanki liderleri defalarca uluslararası mali yardım talep etmiş gibi
    Because no one thought at the time that Austria would receive international aid following World War II                                     Çünkü o zamanlar hiç kimse Avusturya'nın İkinci Dünya Savaşı'ndan sonra uluslararası yardım alacağını düşünmemişti.
    Although until recently its government has been dominated by two political parties                                                         Her ne kadar yakın zamana kadar hükümete iki siyasi parti hakim olsa da
    Despite the damage from World War II and several famines in the late 1940s                                                                 İkinci Dünya Savaşı'nın verdiği hasara ve 1940'ların sonlarında yaşanan birçok kıtlığa rağmen


28.d
The underlying cause of dyslexia, which is a learning disability, is not known, ----.
    as it is characterised by problems in reading, spelling, writing, and etc.            okuma, heceleme, yazma vb. sorunlarla karakterize olduğu için.
    that is, it results from the inability to process graphic symbols                     yani grafik sembollerin işlenememesinden kaynaklanır
    while dyslexic children often confuse the letter ‘d’ with the letter ‘b’              Disleksik çocuklar sıklıkla 'd' harfini 'b' harfiyle karıştırırken
    even though research suggests the condition is often inherited                        araştırmalar bu durumun sıklıkla kalıtsal olduğunu öne sürse de
    so most children with the disability are of normal intelligence                       yani engelli çocukların çoğu normal zekaya sahiptir





29. - 31. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
People have often reported seeing animals, inanimate objects, and people who have previously died.                                 İnsanlar sıklıkla hayvanları, cansız nesneleri ve daha önce ölmüş insanları gördüklerini bildirmişlerdir.
They may be ‘ghosts’ or ‘angels’ and some involve quite complicated scenes or bizarre situations.                                  Bunlar 'hayalet' veya 'melek' olabilir ve bazıları oldukça karmaşık sahneler veya tuhaf durumlar içerir.
These are known as hallucinations. 
Some visual hallucinations are silent, 
  but in some, people speak, often directly to the individual experiencing the hallucination and give them specific commands. 
  But why do hallucinations occur? 
There are a number of psychological explanations for their occurrence.                                                             Bunların ortaya çıkmasıyla ilgili bir takım psikolojik açıklamalar vardır.
Freudians see hallucinations as projections of unconscious wishes or wants.                                                        Freudçular halüsinasyonları bilinçdışı arzu ve isteklerin yansıması olarak görürler.
For example, what a person experiences as “real” in a hallucination is actually something they felt but could not express because it was felt subconsciously.
    Örneğin kişinin halüsinasyonda “gerçek” olarak algıladığı şey aslında hissettiği ama bilinçaltında hissedildiği için ifade edemediği bir şeydir.
Cognitive psychologists point to problems in cognitive processing, particularly metacognition, which is concerned with the understanding of others’ behaviours. 
    Bilişsel psikologlar, bilişsel süreçlerdeki, özellikle de başkalarının davranışlarını anlamakla ilgilenen üstbilişteki sorunlara dikkat çekiyor.
However, it is the biological psychologists who focus most clearly on the causes. 
    Bilişsel psikologlar, bilişsel süreçlerdeki, özellikle de başkalarının davranışlarını anlamakla ilgilenen üstbilişteki sorunlara dikkat çekiyor.
They see hallucinations primarily as deficits in brain states resulting from damage and chemical imbalances. 
    Halüsinasyonları öncelikle hasar ve kimyasal dengesizliklerden kaynaklanan beyin durumlarındaki eksiklikler olarak görüyorlar.
They have been able to identify the chemical processes that lead to hallucinations.
    Halüsinasyonlara yol açan kimyasal süreçleri tespit edebildiler.
Nevertheless, explaining why a particular individual has a very particular hallucination remains something of a mystery.
    Bununla birlikte, belirli bir bireyin neden çok özel bir halüsinasyona sahip olduğunu açıklamak bir sır olarak kalmaya devam ediyor.


29.b
According to the passage, biological psychologists ----.
    see hallucinations as the subconscious of an individual with hidden wishes and desires
    claim that hallucinations may occur due to some physical or chemical problems in the brain
    focus on seeing some spiritual concepts such as ghosts and angels resulting in bizarre situations
    regard hallucinations as the projections of other people’s behaviours and their misinterpretation
    treat hallucinations by giving specific commands to an individual experiencing a hallucination


30.e
Which of the following is true about hallucinations?
    The majority of hallucinations involve situations that are bizarre and complicated, according to cognitive psychologists.
        Bilişsel psikologlara göre halüsinasyonların çoğunluğu tuhaf ve karmaşık durumları içeriyor.
    Freudians have made the most detailed explanation about the reasons for hallucinations.
        Halüsinasyonların nedenleri konusunda en detaylı açıklamayı Freudçular yapmıştır.
    Cognitive psychologists and Freudians share many perspectives on hallucinations.
        Bilişsel psikologlar ve Freudçular halüsinasyonlar hakkında pek çok bakış açısını paylaşıyorlar.
    Freudians reject the idea that hallucinations are about one’s consciousness and feelings.
        Freudçular halüsinasyonların kişinin bilinci ve duygularıyla ilgili olduğu fikrini reddederler.
    Despite finding out about the chemical processes involved in hallucinations, biological psychologists do not know why individuals hallucinate in specific ways.
        Halüsinasyonlarda yer alan kimyasal süreçler hakkında bilgi sahibi olmalarına rağmen biyolojik psikologlar bireylerin neden belirli şekillerde halüsinasyon gördüklerini bilmiyorlar.


31.b
What is the passage mainly about?
    A historical overview of hallucinations
    Psychological approaches to the causes of hallucinations
    Types of hallucinations
    The psychological and physiological effects of hallucinations
    Cognitive processing and hallucinations




32. - 34. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Sweden is Europe’s fifth-largest country, with an area about the size of California. 
    İsveç, yaklaşık Kaliforniya büyüklüğünde bir alana sahip, Avrupa'nın beşinci büyük ülkesidir.
Roughly 1,600 km lie between its southernmost and northernmost points.
    En güney ve en kuzey noktaları arasında yaklaşık 1.600 km bulunur.
About 15% of its area lies north of the Arctic Circle, where, for a few days each summer, the sun never sets, and never rises for a similar period in winter. 
    Yüzölçümünün yaklaşık %15'i Kuzey Kutup Dairesi'nin kuzeyinde yer alır; burada her yaz birkaç gün boyunca güneş hiç batmaz ve kışın da benzer bir süre boyunca asla doğmaz.
The Swedish climate is not severe, thanks to the warming influence of the Gulf Stream. 
Only 7% of Sweden’s area is cultivated farmland; more than half of the country is covered by timberlands, consisting mostly of coniferous forests. 
    İsveç'in yüzölçümünün yalnızca %7'si ekili tarım arazisidir; ülkenin yarısından fazlası çoğunlukla iğne yapraklı ormanlardan oluşan ormanlık alanlarla kaplıdır.
Mountains, fells, and wetlands occupy nearly a quarter of the country. 
    Dağlar, bozkırlar ve sulak alanlar ülkenin neredeyse dörtte birini kaplıyor.
Sweden has about 100,000 lakes, which include Vanern, the third-largest body of fresh water in Europe. 
    İsveç'te, Avrupa'nın üçüncü büyük tatlı su kütlesi olan Vanern'in de dahil olduğu yaklaşık 100.000 göl bulunmaktadır.
The Swedes are proud of the natural beauty of their country and this large variety in landscape makes Sweden a prime travel destination for outdoor enthusiasts. 
    İsveçliler ülkelerinin doğal güzelliklerinden gurur duymaktadır ve peyzajdaki bu geniş çeşitlilik, İsveç'i açık hava meraklıları için önemli bir seyahat noktası haline getirmektedir.
Norrland, the northern three-fifths of the country, is rich in natural resources, including timber, ore deposits, and rivers, whose waterfalls contribute to the national energy supply. 
    Ülkenin kuzeydeki beşte üçü olan Norrland, kereste, cevher yatakları ve şelaleleri ulusal enerji arzına katkıda bulunan nehirler gibi doğal kaynaklar açısından zengindir.
It is here that the local indigenous people earn their traditional livelihood herding reindeer.
    Yerel yerli halkın geleneksel geçimini ren geyiği güterek sağladığı yer burasıdır.


32.b
Which of the following statements about Sweden is true according to the passage?
    Sweden is five times larger than California.
    A very small portion of the country is used for agriculture.
    Mountains and wetlands constitute a great majority of the country's surface area.
    Norrland, the northern three-fifths of the country, is uninhabited.
    Coniferous forests cover only a tiny proportion of the country.



33.b
    Why do many people interested in outdoor activities prefer to visit Sweden?
    There are 100,000 lakes including Vanern, the third-largest in Europe.
    The natural diversity, which the locals take pride in, makes it attractive.
    They may have a chance to meet the local indigenous people herding reindeer.
    They want to be there when the sun never sets in summer time.
    The country being rich in natural energy resources is appealing to them.

34.e
What can be inferred about the local indigenous population of Norrland?                        Norrland'ın yerel yerli nüfusu hakkında ne gibi sonuçlar çıkarılabilir?
        Their work contributes to the national energy supply.
        They are in constant fight with the Swedes over the herding of reindeer.
        They have promoted the tourism industry in Sweden.
        Their livelihood depends on the ore deposits and waterfalls in Norrland.
        They lead a pastoral life in a rural area of the country.                                    Ülkenin kırsal bir bölgesinde pastoral bir yaşam sürüyorlar.

35. - 37. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Britain’s character has been shaped by its geographical position as an island. 
Having never been successfully invaded since 1066, its people have developed their own distinctive traditions and continue to delight in their own nonconformity.             1066'dan bu yana hiçbir zaman başarılı bir şekilde işgal edilemeyen bu bölge halkı, kendine özgü geleneklerini geliştirmiş ve kendi uyumsuzluklarından keyif almaya devam etmektedir.
Britain’s heritage can be seen in its ancient castles, cathedrals, and stately homes with their gardens and parklands. 
    Britanya'nın mirası, antik kalelerinde, katedrallerinde, bahçeleri ve park alanlarıyla görkemli evlerinde görülebilir.
It is also evident in the many age-old customs played out across the nation throughout the year. 
    Bu aynı zamanda yıl boyunca ülke genelinde uygulanan birçok eski gelenekte de açıkça görülüyor.
For a small island, Britain encompasses a surprising variety in its regions, whose inhabitants maintain distinct identities.
    Küçük bir ada için Britanya, sakinlerinin farklı kimliklere sahip olduğu bölgelerinde şaşırtıcı bir çeşitlilik barındırıyor.
Scotland and Wales are separate countries from England with their own legislative assemblies. 
    İskoçya ve Galler, kendi yasama meclisleri olan İngiltere'den ayrı ülkelerdir.
They also have their own surviving Gaelic languages and unique traditions. 
    Ayrıca hayatta kalan kendi Gal dilleri ve benzersiz gelenekleri var.
The landscape is varied, too, from the mountains of Wales, Scotland, and the north, through the flat expanses of the Midlands and eastern England, to the soft, rolling hills of the south and west. 
    Manzara da Galler, İskoçya ve kuzeydeki dağlardan, Midlands ve doğu İngiltere'nin düz geniş alanlarına, güney ve batıdaki yumuşak, engebeli tepelere kadar çeşitlilik göstermektedir.
The long, broad beaches of East Anglia contrast with the rocky inlets along much of the west coast. 
    Doğu Anglia'nın uzun ve geniş kumsalları, batı kıyısının büyük bölümündeki kayalık koylarla tezat oluşturuyor.
Despite the spread of towns and cities over the last two centuries, rural Britain still flourishes. 
    Son iki yüzyılda kasaba ve şehirlerin yayılmasına rağmen kırsal Britanya hâlâ gelişiyor.
The countryside is dotted with farms and charming villages, with picturesque cottages, and lovingly tended gardens.
    Kırsal bölge çiftlikler ve büyüleyici köylerle, pitoresk kır evleriyle ve sevgiyle bakılan bahçelerle doludur.
The most populated part of the nation is the Southeast, close to London, where modern office buildings mirror the growth of the service and high-tech industries.
    Ülkenin en kalabalık bölgesi, modern ofis binalarının hizmet ve yüksek teknoloji endüstrilerinin büyümesini yansıttığı Londra'ya yakın Güneydoğu bölgesidir.



35.a
The ancient castles, cathedrals, and stately homes in Britain are an example of ----.
    its rich cultural past
    British disobedience
    the conflict between Scotland and Wales
    Britain’s resistance to invasions
    the architecture still practised today



36.d
The underlined word “they” in the passage refers to ----.
    the legislative assemblies of England
    the islands of Britain
    the inhabitants of Britain
    Scotland and Wales
    Gaelic languages and traditions

37.e
Which of the following is true of the Southeast part of Britain according to the passage?
    The modern buildings in the area are a direct contrast to the economic conditions the service and high-tech industries operate in.
        Bölgedeki modern binalar, hizmet ve yüksek teknoloji endüstrilerinin faaliyet gösterdiği ekonomik koşullarla doğrudan bir tezat oluşturuyor.
    Despite having successful service and high-tech industries, there are not enough modern buildings in London.
    Modern office buildings of successful service and high-tech industries have been a tradition in the prosperous and densely populated areas of Britain.
            Başarılı hizmet ve yüksek teknoloji endüstrilerinden oluşan modern ofis binaları, Britanya'nın müreffeh ve yoğun nüfuslu bölgelerinde bir gelenek olmuştur.
    Service and high-tech industries have seen unprecedented growth after the region became overcrowded.
        Hizmet ve ileri teknoloji endüstrileri, bölgenin aşırı kalabalıklaşmasının ardından benzeri görülmemiş bir büyüme kaydetti.
    The growth of service and high-tech industries is reflected by the contemporary architecture of the area.



38. - 40. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Influenced by the common misconception, films such as Jurassic Park show dinosaurs with tough, leathery, rhino-like skin, but it has since been proven that many dinosaur species were feathered. 
In a study, a group of scientists have analysed the fossilised remains of the bird-sized dinosaur Anchiornis, which lived 160 million years ago. 
The specimen has particularly well-preserved feather details, a feature that is usually lost during fossilisation. 
Covering its body, Anchiornis had unusual contour feathers plumage not used in flight that were soft and V-shaped, at around one to two centimetres in length.
Longer flight feathers emerged in layers from all four of the animal’s limbs. Anchiornis seems to have
needed extra flight feathers because theirs were not zipped together like a bird’s, and so generated less lift.
Fossil feathers in particular are very hard to interpret for scientists because they are preserved as flat stains derived from the feather pigments. 
So, making an illustration of the dinosaur was very tough, but the researchers worked closely with a scientific illustrator and came up with the most accurate depiction of a dinosaur ever.

38.a
According to the passage, the skin of dinosaurs ----.
    is generally believed to lack feathers but, in fact, many dinosaur species had them
    was first discussed by the films like Jurassic Park before the scientific community
    started to change around 160 million years ago
    had an internal structure that made it impossible for them to fly
    is agreed to be more feathered compared to birds

39.a
It is pointed out in the passage that the remains of Anchiornis mentioned in the passage ----.
    were in good condition in terms of the feather details it had
    were too small in quantity to come to a reasonable conclusion about its flight capability
    lost its fundamental and peculiar features during the fossilisation period
    revealed that bird-sized dinosaurs had feathers tied together similar to birds’
    were ordinary in terms of both feathers and the colours that they had

40.a
According to the passage, the drawing of an Anchiornis ----.
    required a lot of work but resulted in the most realistic dinosaur depiction so far
    lacked the details showing the difference of flight feathers from birds
    inaccurately illustrated a bird-sized dinosaur to compare it to modern birds
    clarified that some dinosaurs were identical to today's feathery birds in terms of feather structure
    was largely influenced by the traditional depictions of dinosaurs by the film industry



41. - 43. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Since the time of Christopher Columbus, Europeans have called the original inhabitants of North America “Indians”. 
Giving them a common name is misleading since these people had no national identity. 
They lived in areas as diverse as the Arctic and the deserts of the southwest, and differed greatly in their lifestyles. 
In the north, the Cree hunted moose and caribou. 
Tribes such as the Huron and the Iroquois in the northeast and the Apache in the southwest were farmers, while those in the northwest relied on fishing. 
Before the Europeans arrived, some tribes of the great central plains cultivated the fertile lands along rivers and streams, while others hunted bison during the summer. 
After European contact, they took easily to the horses that were brought and used them to help in their hunting. 
The huge herds of bison then became more important to Plains Indians ─ they could eat their meat, make their skins into clothing and shelters, and use their bones and horns to make tools. 
Although they survived attempts by European settlers to wipe them out, few native Americans now follow a traditional lifestyle, but most are very proud of their ancestry.

41.a
According to the passage, giving a single common name to all the original inhabitants of North America was inappropriate because ----.
    they were quite diverse and were not identified as one unified entity
    they had nomadic lifestyles before settling down in different places
    very few of them are eager to follow the traditional lifestyle today
    it is still contradictory who the first nation that appeared in the region was
    they mostly farmed as well as hunting, especially bison

42.b
Which statement is true about native North American tribes?
    The lifestyles they adopted were quite similar to one another.
    The Cree lived in the north and hunted moose and caribou.
    Most of the tribes lived in the Arctic rather than the southwest.
    The Iroquois lived in the northeast and relied on fishing.
    Before Europeans arrived, bison was the Plains Indians’ primary food source.

43.d
It can be inferred from the passage that due to European interference ----.
    most native Americans maintained their traditional lifestyles
    the Huron and the Apache living in the southwest relied on hunting
    native Americans learned more efficient farming techniques
    Plains Indians became more successful hunters of bison
    cultivating lands accompanied by hunting became the main priorities for the natives

44. - 48. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi bulunuz.
44.c
Reporter:  So, you say we should spend less time in places like cubicles, cars, and soft armchairs.
Physician:  Exactly! We’re programmed to thrive in nature. Spending time outside boosts our mood and makes us feel calmer.
Reporter:  ----
Physician:  Just simple things like enjoying your drinks or meals outside or doing some workouts outdoors.

    How can we convince people who don’t like outdoor activities?
    Do you agree that outdoor activities in big cities are very expensive?
    What would you suggest for those who don’t know where to start?
    Outdoor activities should be preferred when it is warm, aren’t they?
    Is there good evidence that shows the benefits of spending time in nature?

45.e
Fiona:  I find many ancient Roman buildings simply beautiful. 
         It's really amazing how they were able to create such complex structures.
Mary:  ----
Fiona:  What do you mean?
Mary:  Well, it was in ancient Greece that classical architecture emerged and it was the Romans who contributed much to its advancement in terms of complexity.
        The Romans are known for their contributions to wide range of subjects from postal services to astronomy.
        There are some art historians who claim that the Romans came up with nothing novel to the art of architecture.
        The Romans were not the only ones adopting the Greek styles and techniques in their architectural design.
        The Roman baths are one of the most distinguished examples of the Roman architectural style.
        I guess you should thank both the Greeks and Romans for the elaborate Roman constructions.


46.e
Ann:  You’re reading a lot these days.
Boris:  Not really. I’ve just read two books in the last couple of weeks. It's just that whenever you visit me, you happen to find me reading.
Ann:  ----
Boris:  Why don’t you set yourself a goal of one book a month or something?
Ann:  That’s a good idea. Setting a strict time limit may motivate me to read.
    I just don't like reading books. Rather, I'm usually fine with reading my work materials in my spare time.
    How do you find enough time to read though you’re often busy?
    I don’t read as much as you. I generally prefer to read best-selling novels.
    Two books? That’s more than I could bear. I’ll stick to magazines.
    That’s more than I can do. Whenever I start, I always find a good reason to quit.



47.a
Patient:  I’ve been trying really hard to lose weight but no success so far.
Dietician:  ----
Patient:  A couple of times. But nothing actually worked, though I did my best.
Dietician:  OK, don’t worry. We’ll find out what makes it hard for you to lose weight.
    Well, have you ever consulted a professional before?
    How many times do you eat in a typical day?
    What kind of diets have you tried until now?
    How often do you eat junk food?
    How long have you been on this particular diet?


48.d
Interviewer:  Where did your idea of package delivery using unmanned flying vehicles, drones, come from?
Entrepreneur: Well, I’ve been passionate about aviation all of my life. 
              Also, a few years ago my company decided that technology was then mature enough to pursue it.
Interviewer:  ----
Entrepreneur: One is the capability to operate safely and independently, without crashing into anything or anyone.

    What do you think can you do to make drone delivery economically more competitive?
    Why do you think ordinary people have so many concerns about drone delivery?
    How confident are you that people will choose your delivery system?
    What are some of the technical improvements you want to achieve to enhance the drone delivery system?
    Which types of drones are the most appealing for most customers?


49. - 53. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en yakın cümleyi bulunuz.
49.c
Despite its small size, Costa Rica, whose geography varies from rainforests to arid regions, is home to some of the most intense biodiversity in the world.
    Costa Rica has got one of the highest levels of biodiversity in the world, and rainforests and arid regions make up the majority of the small country’s diverse geography.
    Partly because Costa Rica has a geography that ranges from rainforests to arid regions, the small country possesses some of the richest biodiversity in the world.
    With a diverse geography including rainforests and arid regions, Costa Rica has some of the richest biodiversity in the world although it is a small country.
    Costa Rica’s small size does not prevent it from boasting some of the highest levels of biodiversity in the world, partly due to its geography ranging from rainforests to arid regions.
    While Costa Rica is blessed with some of the most intense biodiversity in the world, it is one of the smallest countries possessing a geography ranging from rainforests to arid regions.


50.b
As well as spoken language, we use body language to pass on a multitude of messages about our moods and intentions.                                            Ruh halimiz ve niyetlerimiz hakkında çok sayıda mesajı iletmek için konuşma dilinin yanı sıra beden dilini de kullanırız.
    A good amount of information about our moods and intentions is passed on to other people using either body language or spoken language.
    Spoken language is not the only means to convey a large number of messages regarding our moods and intentions, we also make use of body language.
    Plenty of messages concerning our moods and intentions are conveyed using spoken language rather than body language.
    We utilise either body language or spoken language to convey some messages related to our moods and intentions.
    Both body language and spoken language have to be used together to effectively convey messages with regard to our moods and intentions.

51.a
Few inventions have had a more immediate or lasting impact on world history than the railroad, the first mode of land transport capable of outdistancing the horse and camel.                                        At ve deveyi geride bırakabilen ilk kara taşımacılığı türü olan demiryolu kadar dünya tarihi üzerinde doğrudan ve kalıcı etki yaratan çok az icat vardır.
    The railroad, the mode of land transport which offered longer distances than the horse and camel for the first time, affected world history more directly and permanently than most other inventions.               İlk kez at ve deveden daha uzun mesafeler sunan kara taşımacılığı türü demiryolu, dünya tarihini diğer birçok icattan daha doğrudan ve kalıcı olarak etkiledi.
    Direct and permanent impact on world history came from a number of land transport inventions, one of which was the railroad, as it made it possible to travel longer distances compared to the horse and camel.
    The horse and camel were outdistanced by the railroad, the first mode of land transport, which came as a more direct and lasting impact on world history compared to other inventions.
    Different modes of land transport that are able to go longer distances than the horse and camel have been invented, but the railroad was the first to have a direct and long-lasting effect on world history.
    World history has been influenced directly and permanently by a great number of inventions, including the railroad, which was the first mode of land transport that outperformed both the horse and camel in terms of distance.

52.d
The learning of culture is an integral part of language education because culture dramatically influences how people speak in everyday interaction.
    Everyday interaction seems to be affected by culture to a great extent, which, in turn, affects how culture is taught in language education.
    Language education, where the way people of a certain culture speak in their routine activities is taught, significantly contributes to the learning of culture.
    Culture largely determines the norms of speaking in everyday interaction, so the learning of culture is perhaps the most important aspect of language education.
    Given that culture substantially affects the way people speak in daily communication, the learning of culture cannot be separated from language education.
    Learning a language means learning the culture of that language; that is, language education also helps people speak in a particular language according to cultural norms.

53.d
Because industrialised countries have been the primary greenhouse gas emitters, they should play a role in helping the world shift to renewable energy sources.
    In order to help the world move to renewable energy sources, industrialised countries should stop releasing greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
    It is the duty of industrialised countries to move to renewable energy sources as they are the world's major contributors to the production of greenhouse gases.
    Although industrialised countries give out greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, they need to help the world to start using renewable energy sources.
    The reason why industrialised countries should help the world to turn to renewable energy sources is that they have been largely responsible for greenhouse gas emissions.
    Not only industrialised countries, which release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, the other countries of the world also need to shift to renewable energy sources.


54. - 58. sorularda, verilen durumda söylenmiş olabilecek sözü bulunuz.
54.d
Your teenage son asks for your permission to go on a five-day camping holiday with one of his friends, Jason.                                         Ergen oğlunuz, arkadaşlarından biri olan Jason ile beş günlük bir kamp tatiline gitmek için izninizi istiyor.
You think Jason has a bad influence on your son and a long holiday might make things even worse, so you firmly refuse to give permission:             Jason'ın oğlunuz üzerinde kötü bir etkisi olduğunu ve uzun bir tatilin işleri daha da kötüleştirebileceğini düşünüyorsunuz, bu yüzden kesinlikle izin vermeyi reddediyorsunuz:
----
    Sorry dear, but such a long trip would definitely be a disaster with Jason. So, we need to discuss it.                                            Üzgünüm canım ama bu kadar uzun bir yolculuk kesinlikle Jason için felaket olur. Dolayısıyla bunu tartışmamız gerekiyor.
    You know I don’t like Jason, but he may be good fun on a trip.                                                                                    Jason'dan hoşlanmadığımı biliyorsun ama yolculukta çok eğlenceli olabilir.
    Do whatever you want, just try to be firm with Jason.
    There's no way I'll allow you to take that trip with Jason.                                                                                       Jason'la o yolculuğa çıkmana asla izin vermem.
    If you obey my strict rules, I won’t stand in your way.                                                                                           Eğer katı kurallarıma uyarsan, yoluna çıkmayacağım.


55.b
It is 1 a.m. and you have an important exam tomorrow but your upstairs neighbour is having a party with lots of people. 
Although you warned them an hour ago, they are still very loud. You go upstairs again and say angrily: ----
    I’m really upset that you didn’t invite me to your party.
    If this party doesn’t end in ten minutes, I’m calling the cops.
    I wouldn’t do this to you if you had something important to do the next day.
    I really miss my old neighbours. They knew how to throw a party. 
    This party is lame. All these people, but no one to talk to.



56.a
You unexpectedly have a free weekend and you heard that a friend has an exhibition of her paintings at a café. 
You are eager to go and you invite your best friend to join you.  He says he does not like such activities. 
So you say to express your disappointment: ----
    Even if you didn’t like the idea of an exhibition, you could at least join me just to make me happy. I felt excited about it.
    I enjoyed it a lot when I last went there. She is a great artist. I think we should give it a try.
    I’m so indecisive about it. What do you think we should do then if we don’t go to the exhibition?
    I obviously chose a wrong activity for us. It'll be a total waste of time. What can we do instead?
    I've been meaning to go to this exhibition for weeks and you know it. Why do you always ruin my plans?

57.c
You have a job interview but it is on the other side of the town. 
You’re running a bit late. One of your friends has a car and offers you a ride to the interview. 
You accept the offer and gratefully say: ----
    You really don’t have to. I can just take the bus.
    I really appreciate your offer, but thanks. I can probably make it if I run.
    Thanks, this helps me a lot! I would miss the interview if I took the bus.
    Please do! I helped you wash your car, so you actually owe me now.
    Maybe I’ll just take the subway, it’s faster and cheaper.


58.d
A friend of yours borrowed some money from you a really long time ago and still has not paid you back. 
You are really close friends and you think he has simply forgotten. 
You don't want to upset him but want to make him understand that you now need the money, so you say: ----
    You always do this. You’re constantly asking for money but you never pay it back. I always have to remind you of it.
    Please pay back the money you borrowed as soon as possible.  Otherwise, I’ll hire a lawyer and take you to court!
    Remember I lent you some money a while ago?  Don’t you think it’s time you paid it back?  It’s been ages!
    I hate to bring this up, but I don’t think I’ll be able to afford my expenses this month. So, is it possible for you to return the money you borrowed soon?
    Do you remember when I lent you that money? It’s been so long, and I don’t think I need it back anymore. So, don’t worry about it.



59. - 63. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek cümleyi bulunuz.
59.a
Sociology is one of a number of social sciences which attempt to understand and explain the behaviour of human beings.                         Sosyoloji, insan davranışlarını anlamaya ve açıklamaya çalışan bir dizi sosyal bilimden biridir.
Unlike some social sciences, it does not confine itself to one particular area of society.                                                     Bazı sosyal bilimlerden farklı olarak kendisini toplumun belirli bir alanıyla sınırlamaz.
---- It is hard to think of any significant area of life which has never been the subject of a sociological study.                             Yaşamın hiçbir zaman sosyolojik bir çalışmanın konusu olmamış önemli bir alanını düşünmek zordur.
    Indeed, sociologists are concerned with a vast range of topics including shopping, popular music, poverty, and migration.                  Aslında sosyologlar alışveriş, popüler müzik, yoksulluk ve göç gibi çok çeşitli konularla ilgileniyorlar.
    In sociology, then, it is essential to understand the social context in which human behaviour takes place.                                 O halde sosyolojide insan davranışının gerçekleştiği sosyal bağlamı anlamak esastır.
    A change in society such as the introduction of new technology can lead to new ways of behaving.                                           Toplumda yeni teknolojinin getirilmesi gibi bir değişiklik, yeni davranış biçimlerine yol açabilir.
    Socialisation is a lifelong process which continues as people change their jobs or roles and as society itself changes.                    Sosyalleşme, insanların işlerini veya rollerini değiştirmesiyle ve toplumun kendisi değiştikçe devam eden, yaşam boyu devam eden bir süreçtir.
    At the most basic level, sociology involves understanding the culture of the society in which social action occurs.                        En temel düzeyde sosyoloji, sosyal eylemin gerçekleştiği toplumun kültürünü anlamayı içerir.


60.b
Microwave ovens do not directly cook food; what they do is heat water.                                                                         Mikrodalga fırınlar yiyecekleri doğrudan pişirmez; yaptıkları şey suyu ısıtmak.
The frequency of microwaves happens to be just right for exciting water molecules.                                                             Mikrodalgaların frekansı, heyecan verici su molekülleri için tam olarak uygundur.
---- Nearly all food contains water, but microwaves will not cook completely dry food like cornflakes, rice or pasta.                          Neredeyse tüm yiyecekler su içerir, ancak mikrodalgalar mısır gevreği, pirinç veya makarna gibi tamamen kuru yiyecekleri pişirmez.
    Microwaves are a form of electromagnetic radiation that sits on the spectrum between radio waves and infrared light.                            Mikrodalgalar, radyo dalgaları ve kızılötesi ışık arasındaki spektrumda bulunan bir elektromanyetik radyasyon şeklidir.
    By spreading their energy evenly through food, the microwaves heat the water in it and the hot water cooks the food.                            Mikrodalgalar enerjilerini yiyeceğe eşit şekilde yayarak içindeki suyu ısıtır ve sıcak su da yemeği pişirir.
    Microwave cookery is similar to heating food in a normal oven, except that the microwaves penetrate deeper and more quickly.                    Mikrodalgayla pişirme, mikrodalgaların daha derine ve daha hızlı nüfuz etmesi dışında normal bir fırında yemek ısıtmaya benzer.
    The molecules in the centre of your soup are not heated any quicker than those on the outside.
    Exciting the water molecules means that the food rarely gets much hotter than 100°C, at which water boils.

61.c
Until now, there has not been a comprehensive map of soil bacteria, 
    but a team of scientists recently took the first steps toward creating one and found out something surprising along the way.                   ancak bilim adamlarından oluşan bir ekip kısa süre önce bir tane yaratmaya yönelik ilk adımları attı ve yol boyunca şaşırtıcı bir şey keşfetti.
    These researchers collected nearly 300 soil samples from 18 countries and as many different environments as possible.                          Bu araştırmacılar 18 ülkeden ve mümkün olduğunca çok farklı ortamdan 300'e yakın toprak örneği topladı.
---- However, the scientists found that across these different environments on Earth, a relatively small number of bacteria species dominated.     Ancak bilim insanları, Dünya üzerindeki bu farklı ortamlarda nispeten az sayıda bakteri türünün baskın olduğunu buldu.
    These tiny organisms, which populate every environment, play active roles in many of Earth’s biological processes.                                  Her ortamda yaşayan bu minik organizmalar, Dünya'nın pek çok biyolojik sürecinde aktif rol oynuyor.
    They create acidic environments, decompose dead organisms and release gases.                                                                        Asidik ortamlar yaratırlar, ölü organizmaları ayrıştırırlar ve gaz açığa çıkarırlar.
    They were expecting to find a diverse array of bacteria species spanning different terrains.                                                        Farklı bölgelere yayılan çok çeşitli bakteri türleri bulmayı bekliyorlardı.
    With this new bacteria list, scientists have a starting point for studying the complex web of ecosystem.                                            Bu yeni bakteri listesiyle bilim adamlarının karmaşık ekosistem ağını incelemek için bir başlangıç ​​noktası var.  
    Of the thousands of individual species of bacteria, only 20 percent of those are known to scientists.                                               Binlerce ayrı bakteri türünün yalnızca yüzde 20'si bilim adamları tarafından biliniyor.


62.c
The carbon cycle is the natural system that, ideally, creates a balance between carbon emitters (such as humans) and carbon absorbers (such as trees) so
that the atmosphere does not contain an increasing amount of carbon dioxide. 
It is a huge process that involves oceans, land, and air. 
---- You can think of it almost as the Earth breathing in and out.
    The exchange of carbon dioxide between the ocean and the air happens at the surface of the water.
    The seas’ ability to absorb carbon dioxide has long been known to scientists.
    The carbon cycle is called “in balance” when roughly the same amount of carbon that is being pumped into the air is being sucked out by something else.
    Given the important role that carbon dioxide plays in warming the Earth, you may be surprised by how little of it is in the atmosphere.
    Carbon dioxide is composed of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms, connected by double bonds.

63.c
The creation of revolutionary products or practices has no timetable.                                                                                                             Devrim niteliğindeki ürün veya uygulamaların yaratılmasının bir takvimi yoktur.
Great minds give birth to innovations as inspiration hits, necessity requires, or happenstance would have it.                                                                     Büyük beyinler, ilham geldiğinde, zorunluluk gerektirdiğinde veya tesadüfen ortaya çıktığında yenilikler doğurur.
---- The Renaissance, for instance, was a period of great intellectual exploration, an era of innovation in arts, philosophy, medicine, engineering, and science.                 ---- Örneğin Rönesans, büyük bir entelektüel keşif dönemiydi; sanatta, felsefede, tıpta, mühendislikte ve bilimde yeniliklerin olduğu bir dönemdi.
Inventions of the Renaissance include the printing press and movable type.                                                                                                        Rönesans'ın icatları arasında matbaa ve hareketli tip yer alır.
It was also at this time that Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) drew the first plans for a flying machine, a precursor to planes and jets that would be devised and developed centuries later.
        Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519), yüzyıllar sonra tasarlanıp geliştirilecek uçakların ve jetlerin öncüsü olan uçan makinenin ilk planlarını da bu dönemde çizdi.
    
    Human progress is now taking place at an unprecedented pace.                                                        İnsanlığın ilerlemesi artık benzeri görülmemiş bir hızla gerçekleşiyor.
    Nevertheless, the history of the human race can conceivably be called the story of innovation.                      Yine de insan ırkının tarihine, inovasyonun hikayesi denilebilir.
    However, there have been a number of specifically fruitful periods of invention throughout history.                 Ancak tarih boyunca çok sayıda özellikle verimli buluş dönemleri olmuştur.
    Also, their other inventions go beyond basic human needs to enhance human interaction.                              Ayrıca diğer icatları, insan etkileşimini geliştirmek için temel insan ihtiyaçlarının ötesine geçiyor.
    Furthermore, the invention of the electric bulb is said to be a pure coincidence.                                   Üstelik elektrik ampulünün icadının da tamamen tesadüf olduğu söyleniyor.



64. - 69. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi bulunuz.
64.a
Being part of a circle of friends is one of life’s greatest joys, but the dynamics of a group may sometimes be challenging.
    Bir arkadaş çevresinin parçası olmak hayattaki en büyük mutluluklardan biridir ancak bir grubun dinamiği bazen zorlayıcı olabilir.
    Arkadaşlardan oluşan bir çevrenin parçası olmak insanlara hayattaki en büyük mutluluklardan biriymiş gibi gelebilir ancak grup dinamiği bazen zorlayıcıdır.
    Bir grubun dinamiği bazen zorlayıcı olsa da bir arkadaş çevresinin parçası olmak hayattaki en büyük mutluluklardan biri olabilir.
    Hayattaki en büyük mutluluklardan biri, bir arkadaş çevresinin parçası olmaktır ama grup dinamiğini oluşturmak zorlayıcı olabilir.
    Bir grubun dinamiği her ne kadar bazen zorlayıcı olsa da bir arkadaş çevresinin parçası olmak insana hayattaki en büyük mutluluklardan birini verebilir.

65.a
People who watch television more than four hours a day are twice as likely to have a major health issue compared with those who watch less.                                                    Günde dört saatten fazla televizyon izleyen kişilerin, daha az izleyenlere kıyasla büyük bir sağlık sorunu yaşama olasılığı iki kat daha fazladır.
    Günde dört saatten fazla televizyon izleyen insanların, daha az izleyenlerle karşılaştırıldığında ciddi bir sağlık problemi yaşaması iki kat daha olasıdır.
    Günde dört saatten fazla televizyon izleyenler, daha az izleyenlerle kıyaslandığında iki kat daha ciddi bir sağlık problemi yaşayabilirler.
    Günde dört saatten fazla televizyon izleyen insanların karşılaştıkları ciddi sağlık problemlerinin, daha az izleyen insanlarınkiyle kıyaslandığında iki kat daha fazla olması muhtemeldir.
    Daha az televizyon izleyen insanlarla karşılaştırıldığında günde dört saatten fazla televizyon izleyen insanların ciddi bir sağlık problemi yaşama olasılığının iki kat arttığı düşünülmektedir.
    Günde dört saat daha fazla televizyon izleyenlerde ciddi bir sağlık problemiyle karşılaşma olasılığı, daha az izleyen insanlarınkine göre iki kat fazladır.

66.b
All the activities that keep the body alive are constantly controlled by the nervous system which works 24 hours a day, collecting information about how body parts are working.                Vücudu canlı tutan tüm faaliyetler, 24 saat çalışan ve vücut parçalarının nasıl çalıştığı hakkında bilgi toplayan sinir sistemi tarafından sürekli olarak kontrol edilir.
    Sinir sistemi 24 saat çalışarak uzuvların nasıl çalıştığı hakkında bilgi toplar ve bedeni canlı tutan tüm aktiviteleri sürekli kontrol eder.
    Bedeni canlı tutan bütün aktiviteler, uzuvların nasıl çalıştığı hakkında bilgi toplayarak günde 24 saat çalışan sinir sistemi tarafından sürekli kontrol edilir.
    Bedeni canlı tutan tüm aktiviteler, sinir sisteminin uzuvların nasıl çalıştığı hakkında sürekli bilgi toplaması ve 24 saat çalışmasıyla kontrol edilir.
    24 saat boyunca çalışan sinir sisteminin uzuvların nasıl çalıştığı hakkında bilgi toplaması sayesinde bedeni canlı tutan bütün aktiviteler sürekli denetlenir.
    Bedenin canlı kalmasını sağlayan bütün aktiviteler, sinir sisteminin 24 saat çalışması ve uzuvların nasıl çalıştığı hakkında sürekli bilgi toplanması ile denetlenir.


67.b
The Indian Ocean formed over the period of the last 120 million years as the landmasses of India and Australia moved away from Africa.
    Hindistan ve Avustralya kara parçalarının Afrika’dan ayrılması son 120 milyon yıllık süre zarfında Hint Okyanusu’nu meydana getirmiştir.
    Hint Okyanusu, son 120 milyon yıllık süreçte Hindistan ve Avustralya kara parçalarının Afrika’dan ayrılmasıyla meydana gelmiştir.
    Son 120 milyon yılda oluşan Hint Okyanusu, Hindistan ve Avustralya kara parçalarının Afrika’dan ayrılmasıyla meydana gelmiştir.
    Hint Okyanusu, yaklaşık 120 milyon yıl önce Hindistan ve Avustralya kara parçaları Afrika’dan ayrıldığı için oluşmuştur.
    Hint Okyanusu’nun son 120 milyon yılda oluşmasına sebep olan olay, Hindistan ve Avustralya kara parçalarının Afrika’dan ayrılmasıdır.

68.d
Feelings of isolation and loneliness form the core of most emotional disorders, so we need others' support not to experience these feelings.
    Birçok duygusal rahatsızlığın temelinde soyutlanma ve yalnızlık hisleri bulunmaktadır bu yüzden bu tür duygulara kapılmamak için başkalarının desteğine ihtiyaç duyarız.
    Birçok duygusal rahatsızlığın temelini oluşturan soyutlanma ve yalnızlık hislerini yaşamamak için başkalarının desteğine ihtiyacımız vardır.
    Soyutlanma ve yalnızlık hisleri pek çok duygusal rahatsızlığın temelinde yer alır bu nedenle bu hislerden etkilenmemek için ihtiyacımız olan şey, başkalarının desteğidir.
    Soyutlanma ve yalnızlık hisleri birçok duygusal rahatsızlığın temelini oluşturur dolayısıyla bu duyguları yaşamamak için başkalarının desteğine ihtiyaç duyarız.
    Soyutlanma ve yalnızlık hisleri pek çok duygusal rahatsızlığın temelinde yatmaktadır bu nedenle bu hisleri yaşamak istemiyorsak başkalarından destek alabiliriz.

69.a
In highly industrialised countries, where most people have a modern way of life, an average family throws away over 1 ton of garbage every year.                    Çoğu insanın modern bir yaşam tarzına sahip olduğu ileri derecede sanayileşmiş ülkelerde, ortalama bir aile her yıl 1 tondan fazla çöp atıyor.
    Birçok insanın modern bir hayat tarzının olduğu büyük oranda sanayileşmiş ülkelerde, ortalama bir aile her yıl 1 tonun üzerinde çöp atmaktadır.
    Büyük oranda sanayileşmiş ülkelerde birçok insanın modern bir hayat tarzının olmasından dolayı, ortalama bir aile her yıl 1 tonun üzerinde çöp atmaktadır.
    Büyük oranda sanayileşmiş çoğu ülkede modern bir hayat tarzı olan ortalama bir aile her yıl 1 tonun üzerinde çöp atmaktadır.
    Büyük oranda sanayileşmiş ülkelerde ortalama bir aile, birçok insan gibi modern bir hayat tarzına sahiptir ve yılda 1 tonun üzerinde çöp atmaktadır.
    Ortalama bir ailenin modern bir hayat tarzı olduğu büyük oranda sanayileşmiş ülkelerde, her yıl 1 tonun üzerinde çöp atılmaktadır.


70.c
Mercanlar çoğunlukla su sıcaklığının 18ºC’den daha yüksek olduğu tropikal kıyılardaki berrak ve sığ sularda yetişir.
    Corals grow in clear and shallow water covering tropical coasts because this is where water temperature is often higher than 18ºC.
    Tropical coasts where water temperature is higher than 18ºC have clear and shallow water in which corals grow in large amounts.
    Corals mostly grow in clear and shallow water on tropical coasts where water temperature is higher than 18ºC.
    Clear and shallow water on tropical coasts where water temperature is higher than 18ºC makes corals grow extensively.
    Corals mostly grow on tropical coasts where water is clear and shallow although water temperature is higher than 18ºC.


71.a
İklim değişikliğinin sebep olduğu kuraklıklar ve su seviyelerindeki değişimler, geleneksel olarak Kenya’daki Nakuru Gölü etrafında çiftleşmek için toplanan flamingoları tehdit etmektedir.
    Droughts and changes in water conditions caused by climate change are threatening flamingos that traditionally gather to breed around Lake Nakuru in Kenya.
    Droughts and changes in water conditions threatening flamingos that traditionally gather around Lake Nakuru in Kenya to breed are a result of climate change.
    Climate change results in droughts and changes in water conditions and this is threatening flamingos that traditionally gather to breed around Lake Nakuru in Kenya.
    Flamingos that traditionally gather around Lake Nakuru in Kenya to breed are threatened by droughts and changes in water conditions caused by climate change.
    Flamingos traditionally gather to breed around Lake Nakuru in Kenya but they are being threatened by droughts and changes in water conditions caused by climate change.

72.b
Bazı araştırmacılar kahve tüketimi ile insanların belirli sağlık sorunlarına karşı direnç geliştirmesi arasında bir bağlantı olduğunu öne sürmektedir.
    A link between coffee consumption and people’s developing resistance to particular health problems is proposed by some researchers.
    Some researchers suggest that there is a link between coffee consumption and people’s developing resistance to certain health problems.
    Coffee consumption leads to people’s developing resistance to certain health problems, as proposed by some researchers.
    According to some researchers, there is a link between coffee consumption and people’s developing resistance to particular health problems.
    Some researchers suggest that people’s developing resistance to certain health problems is linked to coffee consumption.

73.a
Susuz kalmak sağlığımız için iyi değildir ancak su ihtiyacımızı karşılamak için günde sekiz bardak su içmemiz gerektiği fikrinin de hiçbir bilimsel dayanağı yoktur.
    Being dehydrated is not good for our health, but the idea that we need to drink eight glasses of water a day in order to stay hydrated has also no scientific background.
    Being dehydrated is not good for health; however, the claim that we must drink eight glasses of water a day to stay hydrated has not been scientifically proved yet.
    Although the idea that we need to drink eight glasses of water a day to stay hydrated does not have any scientific background, being dehydrated is not good for our health either.
    Being dehydrated has no benefits for our health, but the idea that we should drink eight glasses of water a day to stay hydrated is not based on scientific proof either.
    There is no scientific evidence to prove the idea that we should drink eight glasses of water a day in order to stay hydrated, but being dehydrated is not good for our health either.

74.a
Yeni meydana gelen bir yaralanma için uygulanmaması gerekse de sıcaklık uzun süreli kas ağrılarına faydalı olabilir.
    Although it should not be used for a fresh injury, heat can be beneficial for long-term muscle pains.
    Heat cannot be used for an injury that is fresh but you might use it for long-term muscle pains.
    Heat can be effective for long-term muscle pains, though you should not use it for a fresh injury.
    No matter how beneficial heat can be for long-term muscle pains, it should not be used for fresh injuries.
    Heat, which should not be used for fresh injuries, can be used for long-term muscle pains.

75.b
İnsanları hayvanlardan ayıran temel özellik, insanların kendileri ve çevreleri arasında aracılık eden karmaşık göstergeler yaratma yetisidir.
    Humans are capable of creating sophisticated signs that mediate between them and their environment, and this is the main feature that discriminates humans from animals.
    The basic feature that distinguishes humans from animals is humans’ capacity to create sophisticated signs that mediate between them and their environment.
    Humans differ from animals in that they are able to create sophisticated signs that mediate between them and their environment, which is a key feature of humans.
    Humans’ capacity to create sophisticated signs that mediate between them and their environment is a feature that clearly distinguishes humans from animals.
    Humans have the capacity to create sophisticated signs that mediate between them and their environment, which is a crucial feature that differentiates humans from animals.

76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan cümleyi bulunuz.
76.c
(I) Carbohydrates are a vast and diverse group of nutrients found in most foods. 
(II) This group includes simple sugars and complex forms such as starches, which are broken down during digestion to produce simple sugars. 
(III) In contrast to the other carbohydrates, fibre is a type of complex carbohydrate that cannot be readily digested by our bodies. 
(IV) The main function of the simple sugars and starches in the foods we eat is to deliver calories for energy. 
(V) The simple sugar glucose is required to satisfy the energy needs of the brain, whereas our muscles use glucose for short-term bouts of activity.

77.c
(I) Water is of such great importance that it makes up almost two thirds of the human body by weight. 
(II) It plays a fundamental role in digestion and absorption and in the elimination of indigestible metabolic waste.
(III) Water for the body is obtained primarily by drinking and ingesting food as well as through internal chemical reactions. 
(IV) Water also serves as the basis of the circulatory system, which uses blood to distribute nutrients to the entire body. 
(V) Moreover, water helps maintain body temperature by expelling excess heat through the skin via sweat and evaporation.

78.d
(I) Creativity tests, mostly devised over the last thirty years, are aimed at assessing the qualities and abilities that constitute creativity. 
(II) These tests evaluate mental abilities in ways that are different from ─ and even diametrically opposed to ─ conventional intelligence tests. 
(III) Because the kinds of abilities measured by creativity tests differ from those measured by intelligence quotient (IQ) tests, persons with the highest scores on creativity tests do not necessarily have the highest IQs. 
(IV) Most creativity tests in use today are based at least partially on the theory of creativity evolved by J.P. Guilford in the 1950s.
(V) Creative people tend to have IQs that are at least average if not above average, but beyond a score of 120 there is little correlation between performance on intelligence and creativity tests.


79.b
(I) The Industrial Revolution brought great wealth to factory owners and made basic goods such as food and clothing cheaper than ever before. 
(II) During the Industrial Revolution, a great majority of workers in factories were children; as a result, accidents were very common. 
(III) However, the Industrial Revolution also created a new kind of poverty. 
(IV) Large numbers of people moved to the cities in search of work, where they were packed into crowded, dirty housing. 
(V) Many were unemployed and ended up in prison for debt, or forced to move into harsh lodgings called workhouses, where they performed hard labour for low wages.

80.d
(I) Since their earliest presence on Earth, humans have sought to make sense of their surroundings.
(II) Survival depended on understanding the behaviour of a volcano, the flood cycles of a river, or the optimum time to cross a mountain pass. 
(III) Humans developed ways to record and pass on such information.
(IV) Modern science and information gathering have given anthropologists more insight than ever before. 
(V) As they ventured from their places of origin, by land and by sea, people acquired a broader perspective of Earth's processes and of the patterns and impact of human settlement throughout the world.




