https://app.box.com/s/r5jpbli7blwm20flbvmhqcxx6ih7m96q

1. - 8. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.
01.b
Fairly accurate meteorological ---- are often made by looking at the shape of clouds and watching how they change.
    causes
    predictions
    speculations
    inclusions
    expansions

02.b
The food industry, encompassing businesses that produce, package, prepare, and serve foods and beverages, brings us a food supply which is ---- and readily available.
    decisive            belirleyici
    abundant            bol
    obsolete            modası geçmiş
    futile              beyhude, boşuna
    implicit            örtülü




03.b
Although children’s literature is intended ---- for children, it is more accurate to view such texts as having dual audiences of children and adults.
    tightly
    primarily
    vividly
    allegedly
    divisively

04.b
As their pregnancy ----, most women become increasingly short of breath because of the effect of the hormone progesterone on the central breathing system.
    expands
    progresses
    persuades
    differs
    boosts

05.a
World War II was a catastrophic event that was by far the most deadly and destructive war in human history as it raged on for almost six years in Europe and ---- the death of millions of civilians.
    resulted in
    stemmed from
    took over
    turned into  
    amounted to

06.e
The Louvre Museum in Paris, which ---- in 1793 to display the royal art collection, ---- throughout the years as subsequent rulers increased the size of the collection.
    had been founded / had been growing
    has been founded / is growing
    was being founded / grew
    is founded / will grow
    was founded / has grown                present perfect

07.d
There ---- so much traffic in the air at any one time in many parts of the world that precautions ---- to prevent probable collisions.
had been / can be taken
has been / could have been taken
was / would have been taken
is / must be taken
will be / used to be taken

8.b
Of all the planets ---- the Sun, Earth is the only one with an atmosphere that contains enough oxygen and the right temperatures ---- life.
having surrounded / supporting
surrounding / to support
to surround / to have supported
to have surrounded / having supported
to be surrounding / support

9. - 15. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

9.e
The Tokyo-Yokohama is the largest urban concentration area in the world, and 70 per cent of Japan’s population live ---- the Pacific coast stretching ---- Tokyo and Kyushu.
at / beyond
under / through
in / towards
on / among
along / between

10.b
Organisms compete ---- existence and only survive to pass on their genes to the next generation if they are well-adapted ---- a particular environment.
about / with
for / in
through / on
of / to
along / at

11.b
---- vitamin C cannot prevent us from getting sick, a study conducted in 2017 showed that high doses of vitamin C can reduce the duration of a cold by 17 per cent.
Since
While
Until
As long as
If

12.c
---- we often consider the word 'fluid' to apply only to liquids, gases are also accepted as fluids in physics since they behave similarly in many situations.
Because
In order that
Although
By the time
Provided that

13.
---- knows for certain, but it is believed by ---- scientists that during sleep the brain organises, processes and stores information, and produces memories.
Anyone / each
No one / most
Someone / plenty of
Another / all
One / both

14.
After a supernova, the inner remnant of the star continues to collapse, depending on its size it will form ---- a neutron star ---- a black hole, where the collapse has become unstoppable.
either / or
as / as
so / that
such / as
just as / so


15.
Leaders from Athens, Mexico City, Paris and Madrid have recently announced that diesel vehicles will be banned in their cities from 2025 ---- pollution concerns.
in spite of
except for
due to
along with
by means of


16. - 20. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

One of the world’s most celebrated aviators, Amelia Earhart was the first woman to fly alone over the Atlantic Ocean. 
While working as a military nurse in Canada during World War I, she learned to fly (16)---- her parents’ wishes as it was uncommon for women to show interest in flight. 
In 1928, Earhart became the first woman to fly across the Atlantic, (17)---- she was only a passenger in the plane. 
This soon led to a series of flights across the United States and drew her into the movement that encouraged the development of commercial aviation. 
She set out in 1937 to fly (18)---- the world. 
After completing more than two-thirds of the distance, Amelia Earhart’s plane (19)---- in the central Pacific near the International Date Line. 
While the mystery of her fate (20)---- much speculation about the events surrounding it, the facts remain largely unknown.

16.
contrary to
on behalf of
except for
as well as
in terms of

17.
after
until
unless
although
thus

18.
in
through
around
on
along

19.
accompanied
nominated
preserved
boarded
vanished
used 

to raise
has raised
would have raised
was raising
had raised


21. - 28. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz.
21.d
Although there is an increasing number of articles and books about insomnia, ----.
        the subject has become quite popular in recent years
        sleep disorders seem to be common among teenagers
        there is considerable evidence that it can actually be treated
        few are based on scientific research and clinical practice
        most writers suggest effective solutions for the problem

22.c
Travelling around the Great Lakes in the United States requires a lot of planning ----.
        because residents of the Great Lakes are friendly and polite
        although some people think that driving is not the best way to get around the region
        since there is so much to see and do in such a wide area
        as weather in most of the Great Lakes states is fairly consistent
        even though the Great Lakes states stage a diverse range of cultural festivals

23.c
Even if infants are well cared for during the first two years of life, ----.
        the process is fundamental to create the bond between child and parent
        they can develop the ability to calm themselves and foster alternative behaviours
        their future development will be hampered if they do not continue getting the nurturing they need                hamper - engellemek
        parents can use hundreds of opportunities that arise daily to help them develop
        they begin to babble and produce sounds like ba, da, and ma

24.a
Because much of the information about Greek fashions has come from marble statues, ----.
        many people have long assumed that ancient Greeks dressed mainly in white
        historians have learned from studies that coloured clothing was very popular among Greeks
        wealthy aristocrats wore clothes dyed from a species of shellfish or pure white linen robes
        soldiers wore dark red garments to minimise the appearance of blood on the battlefield
        most Greek clothing was created simply by draping and wrapping a single piece of cloth

25.d
----, we are more likely to select healthy food options.
        As if we are influenced by social media images and popular personalities
        Until extensive menus require large quantities of raw materials and storage space
        As fast food chains could be located in almost any type of building
        If we make a choice to think positively about our bodies, regardless of our shape or size
        Even if we now realise that disease prevention is the foundation of good health

26.a
Scientists are on the brink of wiping out polio – an infectious disease that can cause paralysis – ----.
        but the virus used in vaccines keeps evolving to become harmful again
        unless it has been brought under control by the oral polio vaccine
        only if the weakened virus re-evolves the ability to cause disease
        until the virus undergoes the same evolutionary steps to become extremely infectious
        so the mutations in the lab make the vaccine virus copy itself efficiently

27.b
A bite from a rabid animal does not guarantee that one will get rabies ----.
        while rabies is caused by a number of different viruses that vary depending on geographic area and species
        since only about 50 per cent of people who are bitten and do not receive treatment ever develop the disease
        as the transmission of rabies is almost always through the bite of an infected animal
        even if treatment of the rabies virtually ensures that one will not come down with the disease
        given that the disease has become more prevalent among dogs, foxes, and racoons

28.c
----, not everyone perceives the same events as equally stressful or experience them in the same way.
        Even if defining what is stressful is a difficult task to be accomplished
        Once most of us think of stress as environmental events that place demands on us
        While there are some common sources of stress in an individual’s life
        Because stress can be explained as what is harmful, threatening or challenging for us
        Given that most people have harsh times while coping with stressful events

29. - 31. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.

As much artefact as document, the Rosetta Stone is a slab of black basalt that bears an inscribed text in ancient Greek 
and in two forms of old Egyptian writing: formal hieroglyphics (as seen on royal tomb walls) and the more common demotic script. 
In 1799, during Napoleon’s occupation of Egypt, some of his soldiers found this rock on the Rosetta fork of the Nile River near Alexandria. 
The stone was carved about 2,000 years earlier, in 196 BCE. 
When the French soldiers recovered the stone, nobody knew how to read hieroglyphics. 
The Ancient Egyptian history seemed lost forever until scholars Thomas Young and Jean Francois Champollion worked long and hard to decipher the
Rosetta Stone, establishing that the three texts all said the same thing in different languages. 
Using his knowledge of ancient Greek, Champollion was able to announce in 1822 that he could read hieroglyphics. 
The Rosetta Stone provided an entryway into the remote Egyptian past.

29.d
One can understand from the passage that ----.
        the Rosetta Stone was discovered underground in an ancient Egyptian royal tomb
        Young and Champollion had worked hard to read hieroglyphics until the discovery of Rosetta Stone
        partial erosion on the Rosetta Stone due to river water made it hard to decipher inscriptions
        ancient Greek knowledge of Champollion paved the way for understanding ancient Egypt                    to pave - kaldırım döşemek
        Napoleon was deeply honoured by Egyptians after the discovery of the Rosetta Stone


30.c
It is pointed out in the passage that ----.
        French soldiers eventually discovered the Rosetta Stone in 1799 after long and exhausting excavations
        a stone was found with a well-preserved form in a royal tomb called Rosetta from near Alexandria
        before the discovery and decoding of the Rosetta Stone, the Ancient Egyptian history seemed mysterious and inaccessible
        three different artefacts were found with different inscription styles but the same moral by the French soldiers
        Young and Champollion were called to decipher the Rosetta inscriptions because of their unique expertise in Egyptian inscriptions

31.c
According to the passage, ----.
        the Rosetta Stone was the first artefact having been deciphered and enlightened the royal life of ancient Egyptians
        Napoleon ordered some of his soldiers to search and find the Rosetta Stone because he was aware of its value
        the efforts of Young and Champollion resulted in the discovery of a unified message across the three languages written on the Rosetta Stone         Young ve Champollion'un çabaları, Rosetta Taşı'nda yazılı üç dilde birleşik bir mesajın keşfedilmesiyle sonuçlandı.
        until the discovery of the Rosetta Stone and its deciphering, remote Egypt past had been misunderstood
        the Rosetta Stone allows access into the Ancient Egyptian culture as well as Greek and French culture

32. - 34. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Mammals have spread successfully over the entire world, and have even conquered extreme habitats such as deserts and the Arctic. 
In spite of all external diversities, they have numerous characteristics in common. 
Mammals are the most highly developed vertebrate animals. 
Their constant body temperature grants them a life largely independent of temperatures of the surrounding areas. 
They achieve constant body temperature by a high food intake ─ in comparison to reptiles, for example ─ and an increased rate of metabolism. 
Long respiration, typical of mammals, supplies the body cells efficiently with oxygen. 
The heart consists of two atria and two ventricles, which are completely separated from each other. 
This prevents the mixing of oxygen-rich and oxygen-deficient blood. 
All mammals, except for the egg-laying monotremes, give birth to live young. 
During pregnancy, the foetus is linked to the circulatory system of the female and is supplied with nutrients via the placenta and umbilical cord. 
The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide also takes place using this route.

32.b
Which of the following is true about mammals?
        As a result of their adaptation to living in different habitats around the world, their physical appearances have become varied.
        Compared to reptiles, mammals consume a much higher amount of food in order to maintain their body temperatures.
        Thanks to their oxygen-rich blood, they are able to nurture their offspring.
        Their increased rate of metabolism has helped them to be highly sophisticated animals.
        They share several similarities with reptiles in terms of nutrition and food intake.

33.e
Which of the following is true about the biology of mammals according to the passage?
    Monotremes are a type of mammal which give birth to live young.
    The structure of the mammal heart helps blend oxygen-rich and oxygen-deficient blood.
    The hearts of mammals are unique in terms of exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide.
    Long respiration is a characteristic limited to certain types of mammals.
    The foetus inside a female is able to survive thanks to the placenta and umbilical cord.

34.c
What is the passage mainly about?
        Mammal diversity on the planet
        Distribution of mammals in the world
        Common features of mammals
        Differences between mammals and reptiles
        Reproduction differences in mammals

35. - 37. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Many people want to improve their thinking skills and prevent mental decline. 
Puzzles are a popular choice for mental training, but somewhat lacking. 
The problem with things like crosswords and sudoku is that they are not very varied. 
It is like going to the gym and using only one machine: your biceps might become strong, but you will not be properly fit. 
Instead, you need something more like circuit training or parkour. 
That is why one of your best options is to learn a foreign language.
This will provide a mental workout including many different skills, from challenging your perceptions to learning grammatical rules. 
If you speak to others, you get the bonus of social interaction too. 
Studies also indicate that people who are trying to learn a foreign language have improved executive function – the ability to plan, organise and complete tasks – although these results have recently been disputed. 
There is also evidence that bilinguals develop dementia four years later, on average, than people who are monolingual, and that they recover faster if they have had a stroke.

35.d
According to the passage, puzzles ----.
    can be utilised to support language learning process
    do not play any role in enhancing our thinking skills, contrary to popular belief
    serve as an alternative to language learning for mental training
    provide limited mental training because they are not diverse
    are examples of comprehensive mental training like circuit training and parkour

36.d
Which could be inferred from the passage about language learning?                                                    Dil öğrenimi ile ilgili parçadan hangisine ulaşılabilir?
    Some components of language learning, like perception, improve the ability to learn grammatical rules.
    Learning only one foreign language is like doing physical exercise with only one machine at a gym.
    We might be wrong in the assumption that language learning involves a variety of skills.
    Whether language learning improves executive function is a controversial issue.                                controversial - tartışmalı
    On its own, learning a foreign language may fail to treat dementia and strokes.

37.b
What is the primary purpose of the author?
    To promote the mental benefits of solving puzzles for learning a foreign language
    To encourage people to start learning a foreign language to improve their cognitive skills
    To highlight that language learning has lots of benefits, focusing on the advantages that bilinguals have
    To recommend the reader learn a foreign language if they cannot easily participate in social interactions
    To inform the reader of the health benefits of doing physical exercise to prevent mental decline


38. - 40. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
It is easy to become fatalistic about environmental problems since the destruction of the natural world continues at high speed. 
Many people actively avoid environmental news because it makes them feel hopeless, but there is no reason to despair. 
A recent analysis suggests that while the loss of biodiversity is undoubtedly serious, it is far from unstoppable. 
If we make the right choices now, we can stop the decrease by 2100. What would it take? 
A major step to take is to occupy less space by producing more food from smaller patches of land and using current technologies such as genetic modification. 
In today’s world, such solutions may seem very simple and idealistic, but the other option, fatalism, is simply a guarantee of failure. 
In fact, we still have the chance to save the majority of biodiversity without making huge sacrifices. 
People who care about the natural world have every reason to keep on fighting.

38.b
It can be understood from the passage that a lot of people ----.
    have recognised that they must more actively combat environmental destruction
    feel pessimistic about their ability to prevent the loss of biodiversity
    believe that news on environmental destruction does not reflect the truth
    think that they have done everything they can to save the environment
    have begun to pay more attention to the news focusing on environmental problems



39.e
According to the passage, by 2100, ----.
    the loss of biodiversity will remain at a moderate level if people do not take necessary precautions
    people will need to use far more space to produce large amounts of food
    genetic modification will not be effective alone unless people stop their destructive activities
    those who struggle to save the natural world will have to fight more diligently
    people will be able to stop the decline in biodiversity if they take appropriate actions

40.a
What is the primary purpose of the author?
    To persuade readers that it is not too late to save the environment
    To inform readers that they need to make radical changes in their lifestyles to stop the loss of biodiversity
    To warn readers that they should use current technologies more effectively to protect the environment
    To show that fatalism can trigger people to save the natural world
    To stress that solutions to the loss of biodiversity do not seem feasible


41. - 43. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
Prediabetes is a precursor to type 2 diabetes, but that diagnosis does not necessarily mean diabetes is your destiny. 
“Once you have diabetes, you cannot become un-diabetic—but you can reverse prediabetes,” says Dr.Grazia Aleppo, professor of medicine at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. 
Prediabetes means the body struggles to use or produce the hormone insulin, making blood sugar (glucose) zoom to abnormally high levels, but not quite high enough to be considered full-blown diabetes. 
A third of American adults are estimated to have it, and your risk is higher if you have an immediate family history of type 2 diabetes, you are over 45, or you have had gestational diabetes.
Though many people with prediabetes eventually progress to the full disease, taking steps to make some lifestyle changes such as a healthy Mediterranean diet and more exercise to control blood sugar can help stave it off. 
That is crucial: Type 2 diabetes increases risks for chronic health problems like heart disease, stroke, and impaired nerve, eye, and kidney function.

41.c
According to the passage, prediabetes is ----.
    a medical condition considered by some to be more threatening than type 2 diabetes
    treated through hormone insulin, which increases glucose levels in the blooda stage that comes before the development of type 2 diabetes
    unavoidable if you have an immediate family history of it
    the name of a medical problem first identified by Dr. Grazia Aleppo

42.c
Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about type 2 diabetes?
    People who have chronic health problems are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes.
    One third of Americans will have type 2 diabetes in near future.
    There is no permanent cure for it once a person develops the condition.
    People with type 2 diabetes have higher risk of developing heart disease compared to impaired kidney function.
    It can develop regardless of the kind of diet a person is following.

43.c
The underlined phrasal verb 'stave off' is closest in meaning to ----.
    develop
    detect
    prevent
    cause
    spread


44. - 48. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi bulunuz.
44.c
Mother:  I’m looking for a babysitter, which is really stressing me out. But I thought if anyone could help me, it would be you!
Friend:  I’d be happy to share my experiences! First of all, only contact babysitters that are recommended by other parents. 
          Then, invite the candidates home to meet the children before making a commitment.
Mother:  Well, I’ve already invited a young girl for an interview, but how can I be sure I’m choosing the right person?
Friend:  ----
        What is important is that you should agree on the fee and hours with the babysitter before she babysits.
        Even though you feel sure about this babysitter, it’s also important that your children are happy with her.
        If you and the children like her, and you think she seems reliable, you can ask her to come for a trial sit.
        It is your responsibility as a parent to satisfy yourself that the babysitter will act responsibly and safeguard the well-being of your children.
        She should only babysit when she feels well and she should arrive early so that the children are settled before you leave.


45.d
Susan:  I feel exhausted all the time, like I have no energy at all.
Lydia:  You must feel miserable. What time do you usually go to bed?
Susan:  Sometimes early, sometimes past midnight.
Lydia:  Well, you really shouldn’t play around with your circadian rhythm.
Susan:  ----
Lydia:  It’s the body’s built-in clock. It includes your sleep cycle, and is unique for everyone.
    Where did you learn about circadian rhythm?
    For what time should I set my alarm clock to wake up?
    I don’t. This is already my sleep cycle.
    What do you mean by the circadian rhythm?
    What’s the connection between circadian rhythm and my body clock?

46.c
John:     We are seeing more and more ads for electric cars in the media, and guess what? I’m planning to buy one.
Timothy:  No kidding? A few of my other friends have bought electric cars, too.
John:     Really? Are they happy with them?
Timothy:  ----
John:     I see. Then I should carefully weigh its benefits and downsides. 
           A quick, uninformed decision would mean a disaster for me.
           Generally speaking, they are. Just think about how much the technology has improved in the last 10 years. 
           Absolutely. But there are going to be so many new electric models to choose from in the coming years.
           Well, yes and no. Most of them bought them for environmental reasons, but some complain about problems with the battery.
            Somewhat. They say that they save a lot of money when it comes to maintenance because the engines are much less complicated.
            I don’t know, but what I know for sure is that there are more and more charging stations for electric vehicles.


47.a
Andy:  Looking at the Pyramids in Egypt, do you think Egyptians were more concerned about death than life?
Jean:  Well, contrary to what most people believe, I think they were obsessed with life rather than death.
Andy:  Why do you think so?
Jean:  ----
    Their tombs contain endless 'daily life' scenes, depicting individuals working in the fields, making wine, dancing and numerous other daily activities.
    The ancient Egyptians’ attitudes to life and death were heavily influenced by their belief that eternal life could be ensured by a wide range of strategies.
    In ancient Egypt, each individual was considered to comprise not only a physical body but also three other crucial elements.
    Many recent books have made the point that their real concerns lay somewhere between these two extremes.
    Egyptians used to devote most of their time and financial resources to preparations for death more than we would imagine.

48.e
Instructor:  In some areas of eastern Congo, up to 40 per cent of gold miners are children. What do you think about this?
Student:     I believe every child deserves to be treated under caring conditions at schools instead of working as underpaid miners.
Instructor:  ----
Student:     I'd promote compulsory education and try to provide free education to all children so that no children would have to work in mines.
    What would you do to improve their working conditions?
    Why do you think Africa lacks basic needs for children’s education?
    Do you think you can solve this issue by means of international diplomacy?
    Don’t you agree that this problem requires substantial consideration?
    Can you suggest an effective solution to this issue?


49. - 53. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en yakın cümleyi bulunuz.
49.c
Despite claims of slave labour, it is thought that the Great Pyramid of Giza was built by skilled workers.
    It has been suggested that the Great Pyramid of Giza was built mainly by slaves rather than skilled workers.
    The Great Pyramid of Giza is claimed to have been built by qualified workers who mostly relied on slave labour.
    Although many assume it was built by slave labour, the Great Pyramid of Giza is believed to have been constructed by skilled workers.
    In spite of claims that qualified workers must have built the Great Pyramid of Giza, many assert that it owes its existence to slaves.
    There are claims that skilled workers could not have erected the Great Pyramid of Giza without slave labour.

50.b
In addition to the role of culture in shaping our diets, our own learning experience dictates which foods we will include in our diets.
    Which foods we will have in our diets depends on our own learning experience rather than culture in shaping our diets.
    Together with culture, our own learning experience leads us to choose the foods that will be a part of our diets.
    Which foods we will include in our diets is determined by our own learning experience on which culture has a profound effect.
    Even if the role of our own learning experience in shaping our diets is undeniable, it is the culture which makes the biggest contribution to our food choices.
    Our diets, mostly influenced by culture, are not totally independent of our own learning experience.


51.a
Unless an increasing proportion of a nation’s income is devoted to health care, shortages in its services are likely to get worse.
    It is likely that shortages in health care services will continue to worsen if a growing proportion of a country’s revenues is not allocated to it.
    While an increasing ratio of a nation’s income could be devoted to health care, it would still be possible for it to encounter worsening limitations.
    If shortages in health care are likely to worsen within a country, more of that nation’s income must be devoted to services related to health care.
    A growing proportion of a country’s income should be directed at reducing the likelihood that health care restrictions will worsen.
    A higher ratio of a nation’s income is probably necessary to ensure that the proportion of shortages in health care services is manageable.

52.b
As NASA plans return visits to the Moon, lunar scientists hope for more samples from across the surface and deep underground to learn more about the early history of the solar system.
    In order to help lunar scientists improve their studies on the early history of the solar system, NASA is planning to revisit the Moon and get more samples from across the surface and deep underground.
    Since NASA aims to go to the Moon again, lunar scientists are waiting for more samples from across the surface and deep underground that can provide further information about the early history of the solar system.
    Because lunar scientists wish for more samples across the surface and deep underground to learn more about the early history of the solar system they hope that NASA can revisit the Moon.
    Lunar scientists who are studying the early history of the solar system want to obtain new samples from both across and below the Moon’s surface, so NASA is planning to revisit the Moon.
    The same way in which NASA wants to revisit the Moon, lunar scientists wish to get more samples from both above and below the surface so that they can advance their studies on the early history of the solar system.

53.c
The effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy for various psychological problems has been researched more extensively than any other psychotherapeutic approach.
    Cognitive behavioural therapy is one of the most comprehensively researched psychotherapeutic approaches, and it has proven effective for numerous psychological problems.
    There are a large number of psychological problems for which cognitive behavioural therapy is effective, as opposed to other psychotherapeutic approaches which have been investigated broadly.
    Much more research has been conducted on whether cognitive behavioural therapy is successful in handling a variety of psychological problems, compared to other psychotherapeutic approaches.
    A greater number of psychological problems are effectively tackled by cognitive behavioural therapy than any other extensively researched psychotherapeutic approach.
    The more researchers have investigated the effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy, the more accurately they have been able to compare it to other psychotherapeutic approaches.


54. - 58. sorularda, verilen durumda söylenmiş olabilecek sözü bulunuz.
54.d
Your friend is planning a hike in an area which is well-known for wild animals, such as bears, wolves, and snakes. 
Because of the dangers they pose, you want to warn your friend to be careful, so you say: ----
    That area is known to have wild animals. Hope you can see some of them!
    You know there are wild animals in that area. Don’t call me if you get into trouble.
    Take your camera so you can be sure to capture any wild animals you see on film.
    Stay alert while you’re there, and especially look out for wild animals in the area.
    Don’t worry if you see any wild animals. I’m sure if you ignore them, they’ll ignore you.

55.a
Your friend is shopping for a dress for the school prom and has just tried on a dress which is really ugly. 
She likes the dress so much, but when she asks you your opinion of the dress, you want to tell her the truth. 
So trying not to offend her, you say: ----
    I don’t think that’s a good choice of dress for the school prom. Why don’t you try some others?
    To be honest, the dress looks great on you. But isn’t it a bit revealing?
    I can’t say anything really. You know I have a poor taste in fashion.
    It’s too expensive for such a plain and unattractive dress. Don’t you think so?
    Your parents would never allow you to put on that dress for the prom. Let’s keep looking for a better one, shall we?

56.e
While cleaning up your room in the attic, you find an old book which belonged to a friend. 
You realise that you were supposed to give it back to her months ago. 
So you call her to apologise: ----
    I apologise deeply for my mistake. However, you should have reminded me to give back your book.
    I’m sorry to disturb you, but could you possibly return the book that I lent you a few months ago?
    I would say I’m sorry, but since we are really close friends and know each other well, I know you’ll let this one go.
    I regret to inform you that I have lost your book. However, I will buy you an exact copy to compensate for my mistake.
    I’m so sorry for not returning your book on time, I forgot all about it. I’ll get it back to you as soon as I see you.

57.a
One of your workers is always late for work. 
You’ve already warned him several times, but he still keeps coming in late. 
Finally, you decide you need to fire him. 
You ask him to come to your office and say: ----
    Despite repeated warnings, you continue to be late. So, I’m sorry to inform you that you have been terminated from your position.
    We are actually content with your punctuality, but I’m sorry to say to that you have been made redundant at work.                                                    content - memnun                redundant - gereksiz, işten çıkarılmış, gereğinden fazla
    This is the last time you will be warned about coming to work late. The next time, you will directly be sacked.
    If I were you, I wouldn’t be late for work in the future. The other employees think you are getting preferred treatment from me and it’s making my job more difficult.
    If anyone asks, you can put the blame on me for your coming late. They can’t fire me as I am your boss.

58.a
You ordered a laptop from an online computer company.
When you receive your new laptop, you notice that its battery does not seem to function properly. 
So you call their customer service line and politely ask for a refund: ----
    The laptop I just got seems to have some kind of problem. Could I possibly get my money back?
    My laptop is not working properly. I think you should send me a replacement as soon as possible.
    I would like to speak to your manager, urgently. It’s about the laptop I recently bought.
    If I don’t get my money back immediately, you will be hearing from my lawyer!
    It’s unfortunate that the laptop I bought has problems. Still, I know you did your best.

59. - 63. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek cümleyi bulunuz.
59.b
To form a thunderstorm from a convective cloud, several conditions are necessary. 
---- In an unstable atmosphere, the air temperature drops rapidly with height, meaning any bubble of air that begins rising and cooling will remain warmer than its surroundings. 
At every point in its ascent the rising air acts like a hot air balloon. Since it is warmer and less dense than the surrounding air, it continues to rise.
    Severe thunderstorms also may form tornadoes, columns of air spinning at extremely high wind speeds.
    However, among them, most importantly the atmosphere must be unpredictable.
    Severe thunderstorms may include hail, tornadoes, and damaging straight line winds.
    The most severe cause of flooding usually follows short but very intensive thunderstorms.
    In addition, lightning is a giant spark caused by a build-up of static electrical charges.



60.e
If you use a mobile phone, drive a car or watch a television, the chances are that at least one of those objects will have been made in Korea. 
Korea is one of Asia’s 'tiger' economies, a provider of high technology for the world. 
---- However, it is not how Koreans see themselves, for Korea has always been pivotal in relations between China and Japan, and it has a long tradition of technological innovation. 
It was Korea, for example, that pioneered movable metal type, and it did so well before it was utilised in Europe.
    It has long been divided between a communist north and a capitalist south, severely hindering technological developments.
    By the year 900, Korea was already a rich, urbanised country and a major player in global trade, based at the end of the famous Silk Road.
    Economic relations since the early 1990s have significantly benefited Chinese start-ups in the absorption of advanced technology.
    Most countries see the technology gap between the Western world and Korea as increasing.
    The outside world commonly view Korea as a relatively new player in the global economy.


61.a
History can be written from many different viewpoints. 
A 19th-century European writing shortly after the French Revolution is likely to have very different interests from a Chinese bureaucrat living in the 2nd century BCE, or a 10th-century Muslim traveller. 
Moreover, the interpretation of facts is always open to dispute, and historians often disagree about how one fact is linked with another.
---- The perspective of chroniclers such as the French scholar Geoffrey Villehardouin on the Fourth
Crusade, is very different from that of his contemporary on the opposing side, the Arab historian Ibn al-Athir.
    Throughout history itself, we see evidence of different ideas about the same events.
    History is an incomplete puzzle, made up of fragments from the evidence that is available.
    Names for eras and ages may not necessarily have been used at the time, but now they serve to break down the past into convenient blocks.
    We can never directly experience the past ─ we can never know how it felt to be a gladiator fighting in the Colosseum of ancient Rome.
    Historians ask not only ‘what happened?’, but also ‘why did it happen?’ and ‘what were the consequences?’.

62.d
How do humans and the environment affect each other? 
There are three key concepts to the interaction between humans and the environment: humans adapt to the environment; humans modify the environment; and humans depend on the environment. 
---- For example, clearing a forest for farming produces food, but also destroys trees.
Burning coal provides energy, but also pollutes the air.
    Most of the changes people make on the environment are intentional, such as building wide tunnels through mountains.
    Humans have always had a huge impact on the environment, by changing or trying to blend in with their surroundings.
    The environment provides food and shelter to humans and various sources of energy to maintain their lives.
    Some particular actions that humans carry out have pluses and minuses for them and the environment.
    The environment can shape laws, customs, lifestyles, and economic activities of humans to a great extent.

63.c
Mixing the metals copper and tin creates bronze.
Bronze, like other mixtures of metals, is called an alloy. 
Bronze is harder and stronger than copper.
---- For these reasons bronze is often used to make tools and machinery. 
Bronze is also used to make electrical hardware, springs, fasteners, and coins.
Bronze has been the most popular metal for making statues and other artistic objects since ancient times.
    Bronze also changes colours when exposed to air and water.
    Bronze is also used for making life-sized sculptures of people and animals.
    It also does not wear away as easily as either copper or tin.
    The earliest bronzes date back to the late 4th millennium BCE.
    Bronze is the traditional name for a broad range of alloys of copper.

64. - 69. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi bulunuz.
64.a
Though the paleoanthropological evidence suggests that tattooing likely emerged around 45,000 years ago, we cannot know for certain how old it is.
    Paleoantropolojik kanıtlar yaklaşık 45.000 yıl önce ortaya çıkmış olabileceğini gösterse de dövmeciliğin ne kadar eski olduğunu kesin olarak bilemeyiz.
    Dövmeciliğin ne kadar eski olduğu kesin olarak bilinmiyor ancak paleoantropolojik kanıtlara göre 45.000 yıl önce ortaya çıkmış olduğu düşünülüyor.
    Dövmeciliğin ne kadar eski olduğunu bilemesek de paleoantropolojik kanıtlar 45.000 yıl önce ortaya çıktığını göstermektedir.
    Paleoantropolojik kanıtlara göre 45.000 yıl önce ortaya çıkmış gibi görünse de dövmeciliğin ne kadar eski olduğunu kesinlikle bilemeyiz.
    Dövmeciliğin ne kadar eski olduğunu kesin olarak bilemeyiz ancak paleoantropolojik kanıtlara göre yaklaşık 45.000 yıl önce ortaya çıkmış olabilir.

65.c
Africa has been home to many different kinds of animals, though their numbers dramatically declined in the 1900s because large areas of their habitats were taken over for farming.
    Afrika’nın ev sahipliği yaptığı birçok farklı hayvan türünün sayısı, 1900’lerde bu hayvanların yaşam alanlarının büyük bir kısmı çiftçilik için ele geçirildiğinden oldukça azalmıştır.
    Afrika birçok farklı hayvan türüne ev sahipliği yapmaktadır fakat 1900’lerde yaşam alanlarının büyük bir kısmının çiftçilik için kullanılması sayılarını oldukça düşürmüştür.
    Afrika birçok farklı hayvan türüne ev sahipliği yapmaktadır ancak yaşam alanlarının büyük bir bölümü çiftçilik için ele geçirildiğinden sayıları 1900’lerde büyük ölçüde azalmıştır.
    Birçok farklı hayvan türüne ev sahipliği yapan Afrika’da, yaşam alanlarının büyük bir bölümü çiftçiliğe ayrıldığından, 1900’lerden itibaren hayvanların sayısında büyük bir düşüş yaşanmıştır.
    Afrika birçok farklı hayvan türüne ev sahipliği yapmıştır ancak 1900’lerde yaşam alanlarının büyük bir kısmı çiftçilik için kullanılan hayvanların sayısında büyük bir azalma yaşanmıştır.

66.e
The canals making up the city centre in Amsterdam are not only easy to get around on foot they also offer one of the most lovely walks in all of Europe.
    Hem yürüyerek gezmek için elverişli olan hem de tüm Avrupa’da en güzel yürüyüşlerden birini yapma imkânı veren kanallar Amsterdam’ın şehir merkezini oluşturur.
    Tüm Avrupa’da en güzel yürüyüş imkânlarından birini sunan kanallar hem Amsterdam’ın şehir merkezini oluşturur hem de yürüyerek gezmek için elverişlidir.
    Avrupa’da en güzel yürüyüşlerden birinin yapılabildiği kanallar Amsterdam’ın şehir merkezini oluşturur ve yürüyerek gezmeye elverişlidir.
    Amsterdam şehir merkezi yürüyerek gezmek için elverişli olan kanallardan oluşur ve bu kanallarda aynı zamanda tüm Avrupa’da en güzel yürüyüşlerden biri yapılabilir.
    Amsterdam şehir merkezini oluşturan kanallar hem yürüyerek gezmek için elverişlidir hem de tüm Avrupa’da en güzel yürüyüşlerden birini yapma imkânı sunar.

67.b
Many bows and arrows were depicted in cave paintings from 30,000 BCE onward, but none of the originals has survived until today.
    M.Ö. 30.000 yılından itibaren mağara duvarlarına resmedilen birçok yay ve okun hiçbir örneği günümüze kadar ulaşmamıştır.
    M.Ö. 30.000 yılından itibaren birçok yay ve ok mağara duvarlarına resmedilmiş ancak hiçbirinin aslı günümüze dek ulaşmamıştır.
    Birçok yay ve ok M.Ö. 30.000 yılından itibaren mağara duvarlarına resmedilmiş olmasına rağmen günümüzde hiçbirinin aslı bulunmamaktadır.
    Hiçbirinin aslı günümüze kadar ulaşmayan birçok yay ve ok, M.Ö. 30.000 yılında mağara duvarlarına resmedilmiştir.
    Yaklaşık M.Ö. 30.000 yılında çok sayıda yay ve ok mağara duvarlarına resmedilmiş ama asılları bugüne kadar gelememiştir.

68.c
Scientists are interested not only in the actions of human beings and animals, but also in the actions of inanimate objects such as winds and waves.
    İnsanların ve hayvanların hareketleriyle ilgilenen bilim insanları, aynı zamanda rüzgârlar ve dalgalar gibi cansız nesnelerin hareketleriyle de ilgilenirler.
    Sadece insanların ve hayvanların hareketleriyle yetinmeyen bilim insanları, rüzgârlar ve dalgalar gibi cansız nesnelerin hareketleriyle de ilgilenirler.
    Bilim insanları, yalnızca insanların ve hayvanların hareketleriyle değil, aynı zamanda rüzgârlar ve dalgalar gibi cansız nesnelerin hareketleriyle de ilgilenirler.
    Bilim insanları, sadece insanların ve hayvanların hareketleriyle ilgilenmekle kalmayıp rüzgârlar ve dalgalar gibi cansız nesnelerin hareketlerini de merak ederler.
    Bilim insanlarının ilgilendikleri şeyler sadece insanların ve hayvanların hareketleri değil, aynı zamanda rüzgârlar ve dalgalar gibi cansız nesnelerin de hareketleridir.

69.b
Ancient Egyptians worshipped hundreds of gods, many of whom were represented by animals, and each one of them was thought to have specific powers.
    Özel güçlere sahip olduğuna inanılan yüzlerce tanrının pek çoğu hayvanlarla simgelenirdi ve eski Mısırlılar bu tanrıların her birine taparlardı.
    Eski Mısırlılar, pek çoğu hayvanlarla simgelenen yüzlerce tanrıya taparlardı ve bu tanrıların her birinin özel güçlere sahip olduğuna inanılırdı.
    Eski Mısırlıların taptığı yüzlerce tanrının pek çoğu hayvanlarla simgelenirdi ve bu tanrıların her birinin özel güçlere sahip olduğuna inanılırdı.
    Eski Mısırlılar, her birinin özel güçlere sahip olduğuna inanılan yüzlerce tanrıya taparlardı ve bunların pek çoğu hayvanlarla simgelenirdi.
    Eski Mısırlılar, her birinin özel güçlere sahip olduğuna inanılan ve pek çoğu hayvanlarla simgelenen yüzlerce tanrıya taparlardı.



70. - 75. sorularda, verilen Türkçe cümleye anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz.
70.b
Çoğumuz D vitamini ihtiyacımızı karşılamak için güneş ışığına bağımlıyız ve yeterli miktarda güneş ışığı, besin takviyesi olmadan bütün ihtiyacımızı karşılayabilir.
    The sunlight can be sufficient for our need of vitamin D, so most of us depend on it other than dietary supplements to supply our entire requirement.
    Most of us depend on sunlight for meeting our vitamin D needs and sufficient sunlight can supply our entire requirement without dietary supplements.
    For the majority of us, sunlight is enough for meeting our vitamin D needs and we can depend on it to supply our entire requirement without dietary supplements.
    In order to meet our entire vitamin D requirement, most of us depend on sunlight that can supply it sufficiently and do not take any dietary supplements.
    All of us depend on sunlight to get our vitamin D and enough exposure to sunlight can supply our entire requirement so there is no need for dietary supplements.

71.b
Deprem sırasında çeşitli sismik dalgalar gezegenimize yayılır ve bunların hızı ve yönünü belirlemek, yer kabuğunun haritalarını yapmak ve gelecekteki depremlerin ne kadar yıkıcı olabileceğini tahmin etmek açısından gereklidir.
    The speed and direction of various seismic waves that travel through our planet during an earthquake are essential to make maps of Earth’s crust and predict how disastrous the future strikes can be.
    During an earthquake various seismic waves travel through our planet, and determining their speed and direction is essential for making maps of Earth’s crust and predicting how devastating the future strikes may be.
    By determining the speed and direction of various seismic waves that travel through our planet during an earthquake, it is possible to make the essential maps of Earth’s crust and predict how catastrophic the future strikes can be.
    During an earthquake, the speed and direction of various seismic waves that travel through our planet can be determined, and this is essential for making maps of Earth’s crust and predicting how catastrophic the future strikes could be.
    During an earthquake, it is essential to determine the speed and direction of various seismic waves travelling through our planet, which is important for making maps of Earth’s crust and predicting how disastrous the future strikes might be.

72.b
Kardeşler arasında belirli bir miktar rekabet kaçınılmaz olsa da bunun şiddetini ve çocuklar üzerindeki potansiyel etkilerini azaltmak için ebeveynlerin alabileceği bazı önlemler bulunmaktadır.
    Even though rivalry between siblings cannot be avoided to a certain extent, parents can take some measures that help to decrease the level of its severity and its potential effects on children.
    Although a certain amount of rivalry is unavoidable between siblings, there are some measures that parents can take to reduce its severity and its potential effects on children.
    The intensity of sibling rivalry and its potential effects on children can be reduced by parents by taking some measures, while it is not possible to avoid a certain amount of it.
    Rivalry between siblings is inevitable to some extent, but parents can control its severity and its potential effects on children through some measures.
    There exists some parental measures that can lessen the intensity of sibling rivalry and its potential effects on children despite the inevitability of a certain amount.


73.d
Felsefe, yüzyıllardır, gözlemle çözülemeyecek önemli soruların cevaplarına yaklaşmanın tek yolu olarak kabul edilmektedir.
    Coming closer to answers to important questions that cannot be resolved through observation, philosophy has been regarded for centuries as the only way to deal with them.
    Regarded as the only way to come closer to answers to important questions, philosophy has acknowledged for centuries that they cannot be resolved through observation.
    Philosophy is regarded as the only way to come closer to answers to important questions that have not been resolved through observation for centuries.
    Philosophy has been acknowledged for centuries as the only way to come closer to answers to important questions that cannot be resolved through observation.
    Regarding the important questions that have not been resolved through observation for centuries, it has been acknowledged that the only way to come closer to their answers is philosophy.

74.a
Tip 1 diyabet hastalığı, vücut yanlışlıkla pankreastaki insülin hormonunu üreten hücreleri yok ettiğinde ortaya çıkar.
    Type 1 diabetes occurs when the body accidentally destroys the cells in the pancreas that produce the hormone insulin.
    When the cells in the pancreas producing the hormone insulin are accidentally damaged by the body, Type 1 diabetes develops.
    The body’s accidental destruction of the cells in the pancreas that release the hormone insulin results in Type 1 diabetes.
    If the body accidentally damages the cells in the pancreas that release the hormone insulin, it is very likely that Type 1 diabetes arises.
    Type 1 diabetes manifests itself after the cells in the pancreas producing the hormone insulin are accidentally destroyed by the body.




75.b
Atomlar o kadar küçüktür ki, bu cümlenin sonundaki nokta bile 20 milyon atom genişliğindedir.
    The tiny scale of atoms can be observed from the fact that we would need 20 million atoms to fill the width of the period at the end of this sentence.
    Atoms are so tiny that even the period at the end of this sentence has a width of around 20 million atoms.
    Although the period at the end of this sentence can accommodate 20 million atoms, their width may not be so large.
    The period at the end of this sentence has a width of 20 million atoms, which makes them really tiny.
    No matter how tiny atoms may be, we would need around 20 million of them to have a width of the period at the end of this sentence.

76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan cümleyi bulunuz.
76.c
(I) In a study called ‘Food Art Does Not Reflect Reality’, researchers from Cornell University’s Food and Brand Lab analysed American and European paintings of family meals between the years 1500 and 2000. 
(II) The study compared how frequently a food item was depicted in art with how commonly it was consumed.
(III) Drawings in cappuccino foam and artfully-staged overstuffed hamburgers, for instance, showed that social media is an endless feed for food. 
(IV) Although lobster, hazelnuts and lemons were quite rare, they were particularly popular. 
(V) This art, they discovered, was used to show off wealth or talent than to display the food actually eaten.

77.b
(I) It might not be a comforting thought for most people that spiders can hear you when you arrive home.
(II) Most spiders are perfectly harmless, but they still manage to frighten people. 
(III) Recently, a type of jumping spider, Phidippus audax, has been studied and the discovery made about its sense of hearing is surprising. 
(IV) It had been thought to rely almost completely on sight and the vibrations it feels through objects. 
(V) But microelectrodes implanted in the spiders’ brains showed that their neurons responded to sounds such as chairs scraping and people clapping even when the noises were made between 3 and 5 metres away.


78.e
(I) The problem of translating colour words arises in two quite distinct forms. 
(II) The first occurs where the colour
word is employed in a purely descriptive and literal sense. 
(III) Here the solution depends upon visualising the exact colour meant by the word in the source language and knowing the correct equivalent in the target language by which to translate it. 
(IV) The second case confronts the translator in the form of an entirely metaphorical use of a colour, e.g., 'black despair'.
(V) Colour is, in fact, probably the most common factor employed in the formation of metaphors in all languages.

79.d
(I) The retina, the screen at the back of the eye on which the lens of the eye casts its image, contains two different kinds of sensitive elements. 
(II) One set, the rods, register shape; the other, the cones, register colour. 
(III) Animals that sleep at night and are active mostly during the daylight hours have a mixture of both of these in their retinas. 
(IV) Some species are able to see over an even wider colour spectrum than we can.
(V) But colour is largely invisible at night so nocturnal creatures have eyes with retinas packed almost entirely with rods.

80.d
(I) The principal task of a shampoo is to clean the hair.
(II) For that purpose, shampoo contains surface-active substances, so-called surfactants, that become attached to the water-insoluble dirt and fat deposits in the hair. 
(III) Subsequently, they are washed away again with water when the hair is rinsed and shampoo removed. 
(IV) Sodium laureate sulphate is what makes the shampoo foam. 
(V) We should, however, be careful about removing too much fat from the hair because the fatty substances also have a protective function.





