
1. - 8. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

01.a
Scientists believe an asteroid struck the planet Earth off Mexico’s Yucatán Peninsula some 65 million years ago, bringing about the ---- of almost 50 percent of the plant species then living on Earth.
extinction
identification
differentiation
invasion
exhibition

02.d
The influence of ancient Greek civilisation, art and architecture, which were passed on by the Romans, is still ---- all around us.
abrupt
reasonable
competitive
visible
confidential


3. C
While toys today are ---- associated with children, historically, toys were the province of adults and were only gradually passed on to the young.
separately
consecutively
widely
slightly
arbitrarily

4. A
Cognitive and behavioural changes after a stroke are common yet often ---- because their effects may be subtle.
overlooked
identified
avoided
estimated
examined

5. A
It is important to have big goals, but we need to ---- these goals into small, measurable pieces, or milestones, making them easier to handle and achieve.
break down
reflect on
pull through
cut off
put off

6. A
During a supernova, the outer parts of a star ---- by a
pressure wave so intense that atoms heavier than
iron, such as copper and gold, ----.
are blasted off / can be formed
will be blasted off / must be formed
were blasted off / might be formed
are being blasted off / should be formed
are going to be blasted off / would be formed

7. B
Until recently, human storm chasers ---- close enough to a tornado to insert their measuring equipment by hand, but now, they ---- risk their lives for much longer thanks to the newly-developed drones.
used to get / must not need to
had to get / may not need to
should have got / might not need to
may have got / should not need to
must have got / could not need to

8. B
Icarsos are power songs ---- by the shamans during healing rituals ---- good spirits.
singing / attracting
sung / to attract
to sing / to have attracted
being sung / attract
sing / to be attracting

9. - 15. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

9. B
According to dietary data analysed by Public Health England, children in England consume an average of 11 grams of sugar at breakfast, largely ---- drinks, cereals, and spreads, which equates ---- eating three sugar cubes.
about / in
from / to
along / for
after / with
at / around


10. B
Lions kill fewer than 100 people each year and sharks kill only ten people per year, yet the World Health Organisation estimates that ---- 725,000 people are killed indirectly ---- mosquitoes and the diseases they transmit.
upon / with
around / by
under / in
from / at
for / off

11. B
All living things on Earth need water ---- it is possible that there could be life elsewhere that uses different mechanisms and chemistry.
so
but
as
as though
if


12. B
---- Nigeria is potentially the richest nation in Africa, with huge reserves of oil and natural gas, the money earned from these natural resources has not been used properly, and most Nigerians remain very poor.
Because
Although
Until
Now that
Only if

13. A
While orcas in captivity may attack their human keepers, there have been ---- documented cases of orcas attacking humans in the wild and certainly ---- fatal encounters have been observed.
very few / no
any / many
some / neither
both / either
several / some

14. D
Without your spine, which is a line of bones running
down the back of your body, you could ---- hold up
your head and body, ---- make any kind of
movement.either / orwhether / ornot only / but alsoneither / northe more / the more


15. D
Climate change is already harming around 700 species of mammals and birds ---- issues such as habitat loss and droughts.
in spite of
rather than
on behalf of
because of
in case of



16. - 20. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

People are in a constant search for different sources of energy. 
Today, we meet most of our energy needs by burning fossil fuels (16)---- coal, oil and natural gas.
(17)----, one problem with fossil fuels is that when burned for energy, they release carbon dioxide and other gases.
For instance, burning these fossil fuels releases large amounts of greenhouse gases, which are also released when they are retrieved from the earth. 
Namely, extracting the fuels and processing them (18)---- their final forms require fossil fuels, and thus produce carbon dioxide. 
Another problem is that fossil fuels give a one-time-only burst of energy. 
Therefore, since the supply of fossil fuels is limited and will finish one day, civilisation will have to wait millions of years before any more (19)----. 
That is why people will have to (20)---- a diversity of fuel sources to produce energy in the future.

16. A
such as
contrary to
due to
according to
except for

17. B
In other words
However
Otherwise
For example
Accordingly


18. D
upon
towards
off
into
against

19. B
had existed
exist
existed
will be existing
would have existed

20. B
bring about
rely on
give away
put out
sell out









21. - 28. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz.

Although freeways were originally meant to alleviate traffic in big cities, ----.
    they actually increased traffic levels, by encouraging the use of the automobile over public transportation
    access to the city by automobile allowed people to arrive at their destinations faster
    the expected volume of traffic must be estimated, with minimum and maximum levels established
    they are constructed according to strict guidelines regarding their design and structure
    their construction requires vast amounts of money and considerable workforce


Despite the popularity of low-carb diets in society, ----.
an excessive intake of carbohydrates has been shown to lead to an elevated risk of heart disease
most food science experts recommend that adult
humans get the majority of their energy from carbohydrates
complex carbohydrates, such as starch and glycogen, are used by living creatures for energy storage
research indicates that carbohydrates are not essential for chemical signalling processes that assist functioning of cell
sit is a fact that carbohydrates eaten today may be deposited in the body as fat tomorrow




While the most common cause of colour blindness is genetic, ----.
it can also result from diseases such as diabetes, Alzheimer's and Parkinson'sit does not allow people to differentiate between various shades of certain colours
there is actually a very limited range of colours the eye can pick up correctly
eyes with various defective cells can confuse three colours – red, green, and blueits inheritance is through female carriers passing the gene to 50% of their sons

While there has been much research into the biological basis of schizophrenia, ----.
its classical symptoms include delusions and hallucinations
for many people with it, brain development takes a different pathway from an early stage
symptoms start with subtle changes in childhood thinking and behaviour
the disorder still remains one of the true mysteries of medicinethere are a number of blood tests for definitively diagnosing schizophrenia



----, there has been a rise in home cooking thanks to
simpler recipes and celebrity chefs.Even if there are now better-quality ingredients
available to all of us than ever beforeDespite the fact that our reliance on restaurants, and
take-out food has increasedGiven that dining out at fancy restaurants makes some
people feel wealthierAs professional cooking is all about preparing the
tastiest food for the customersIf replicating restaurant food without restaurant
equipment is possibleThe first sea traders stayed close to the coast so
they knew where they were ----.now that the sea transport industry looks to have
slowly overcome its challenges with the latest
advances in technologyeven though sea transportation of people and goods
has been necessary for society for thousands of yearsdespite road transport playing an important economic
role in all developed countries and causing
considerable carbon emissionwhereas in modern times, powerful engines and
satellite navigation greatly reduce the risks of long sea
voyageseven if the fuel prices have increased and fuel saving
in sea transport systems has attracted serious
attention
25.
Hare and rabbit offspring are very different with hares being born fully furred and with open eyes ----.
while the arctic rabbits’ coat changes colour for camouflaging in the winter to blend in with the snoweven if rabbits do not grow fur until over a week after
they are born and rely on their parents’ carewhereas rabbits are born unprotected against cold and cannot see for around ten dayseven though rabbits live in social groups for safety in
numbers rather than living alone like hares dosince rabbits are herbivores and feast almost exclusively on weeds

Smaller, sub-toxic exposures to chemicals might be referred to as contamination; ----.
    therefore, with the advances in technology, new industrial uses for existing chemicals are found
    on the other hand, larger ones are considered to represent poisoning or pollution
    nonetheless, many poisonous chemicals are present naturally in the environment
    as a result, humans are responsible for many of the toxic chemicals
    instead, the topic of contamination has caused disagreements among chemists



A humanoid robot, often referred to as an android in science fiction, is designed to resemble the human form. 
Basic humanoid automatons have existed for centuries, and have gradually been refined to more closely mimic our appearance and behaviour. 
One of the first well-documented examples is Leonardo da Vinci’s mechanical knight. 
Da Vinci’s robot was operated by a series of pulleys (a set of wheels) and cables that allowed it to stand, sit and independently move its arms. 
It had a human form and was even dressed in armour to resemble a knight. 
Although da Vinci’s design is primitive by today’s standards, lacking any artificial intelligence or remote control, it was ahead of its time in the 15th century. 
Da Vinci employed the use of pulleys, weights and gears in many of his inventions, including his self-propelled cart which many consider to be the first robot. 
He later went on to design the robot knight for a royal event in Milan that took place during the late 1490s. 
Da Vinci’s drawings for the robot knight are still used as models by modern robotics, and even helped develop robots for NASA.

According to the passage, which of the following is true about humanoid robots?
    They must have artificial intelligence and other mechanisms to be considered robots.
    They have been modified over time to make them resemble humans more.
    They have not been very well-documented throughout history.
    They are quite dissimilar to science fiction androids.
    They have just begun to emerge in recent years.

29. - 31. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.

It is stated in the passage that da Vinci’s robot ----.
    drew more attention than his self-propelled cart in a royal event in Milan
    was covered in armour since it was planned to be used for military purposes
    was history’s first example of artificial intelligence
    could make physical movements with the aid of several mechanisms
    had no detailed record of its design, which made it look primitive

It can be understood from the passage that da Vinci’s design of the robot knight proves its practicality as it ----.
    has enabled the production rates of humanoid robots gain considerable momentum
    is still considered sophisticated even by today’s standards
    was constructed by pieces that were technologically ahead of its time
    has been utilised as sketches for works in modern robotics
    has facilitated further improvements in artificial intelligence technology

In the 1900s, birds were tagged with string around their legs and handwritten identification codes. 
In the 1940s, radar was used to study migrating animals, and by the 1950s, sonar was being used. 
In the last 30 years, scientists have started to track animals using satellite technology. 
In recent years, tracking transmitters have become smaller and more efficient thanks to
improvements in battery technology and the use of solar panels. 
Generally, 3% of the weight of an animal is considered to be the upper limit for the weight of such
devices, and so far, the lightest transmitters to be developed weigh only 0.6g. 
Indirect techniques are used too. 
For example, Australian researchers use ‘proximity sensors’ that emit a beam of electromagnetic radiation to monitor bats without the need for physical contact.
These are used to model and assess the spread of diseases.
Other non-invasive methods include: 
temperature and CO2 level checks, monitoring inside
beehives, counting footprints next to ant nests, using
drones to collect periodic photos of animals, and positioning cameras next to nests and hives for use with image recognition software to count individual animals.
It is clearly pointed out in the passage that tracking animals ----.

has never been as easy as it was during the emergence of radar technology
has become more and more efficient since the beginning of the 20th century
was done with handwritten identification codes between the 1940s and 1950s
has raised concerns among researchers on the well-being of animals with tracking transmitters
was not possible during migration due to limitations in radar technology

32. - 34. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
It is stated in the passage that the weight of tracking transmitters ----.
    has become a significant issue since the introduction of solar panels
    is very important especially when tracking migrating animals
    should not surpass a certain threshold which is calculated according to the weight of the animal
    affects the movements of larger animals more than smaller ones
    is still being investigated in terms of trackability

According to the passage, other than tracking transmitters, ----.
    methods which do not require the placement of equipment on animals are also used
    young researchers are looking into the availability of less invasive methods
    indirect techniques are only used to track bats or other flying creatures
    methods in which data are collected through observation with cameras are most popular
    motion-sensitive cameras might be used in the future if this technology gets cheaper


One of the most intriguing questions in American
archaeology: Who were the earliest people in the
Americas? For much of the past 80 years, scholars
have thought that they were members of the Clovis
culture, whose ancestors came to North America from
Siberia some 13,000 years ago. In recent decades,
however, archaeologists have come to believe that
people reached North America far earlier. A new
discovery from the Gault site, in central Texas, offers
robust evidence not only for a much earlier peopling of
the Americas, but also of a previously unknown tool
tradition that is older and more varied than scholars ever
expected. Archaeologists have found stone tools
including projectile points, blades, and flake tools at the
Gault site, the oldest of which date to between 20,000
and 16,000 years ago, thousands of years older than
any of the stone spear points for which the Clovis are
known. “What we’re seeing is a well-developed toolkit,”
says Tom Williams of Texas State University. “These
were clearly people adapted to surviving in their
environment.”According to the passage, the Clovis culture ----.had members who had come to North America from
Siberia even earlier than 13,000 years agowas traditionally considered by scientists to be the first
people to inhabit the Americashad a fierce rivalry with some even earlier cultures in
the Americas over the development of sophisticated
toolshas shown significant differences from their ancestors
in terms of tool making practicescannot be associated with people migrating from
Siberia, as previously believed by scholars
35. - 37. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre
cevaplayınız.
35.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)The recent archaeological evidence mentioned in
the passage ----.was about a discovery of a new toolkit the Clovis
people used 20,000 years agohas supported the view that the ancestors of the
earliest Americans were forced out of Siberiais likely to lead scientists to reconsider their opinions
regarding who the earliest Americans weresuggests that the Clovis people had actually
developed an advanced tool tradition much earlier
than previously thoughtwas found by researchers who had long suspected
that the earliest Americans lived between 20,000 and
16,000 years ago
What is the passage mainly about?Tools used by the earliest Americans
The ancestors of the Clovis peopleThe development of new tools by the Clovis people
New insights about the early Americans
Recent archaeological techniques to date tools


When a meal you have ordered in a restaurant arrives cold, would you keep quiet or send it back? 
A 2015 survey found that, although 90 percent of us believe that you should speak up if you are unhappy with a service, just one third of us actually would. 
One school of thought says complaining is bad for our health, making it more likely we will think negatively, and increases levels of the stress hormone cortisol. 
Also, it is not just our own complaining that can be detrimental. 
Professor Robert Sapolsky, an expert in the field of complaining, says that being exposed to just 30 minutes of complaining a day (including hearing it on TV) can cause your brain to have the same emotional reaction as being stressed. 
On the other hand, complaining in the right way may be beneficial to your health. 
A 2014 study found that those who complained with the hope of achieving a certain result tended to be happier, more mindful people than those who simply complained for the sake of it.
According to the passage, complaining ----.
    affects us in a negative way 90 percent of the time
    can be helpful when people do it to reach a goal
    does not help in restaurants if one wants to have a hot meal
    was proved by the 2015 survey to be beneficial in stressful conditions
    is just as detrimental to your health as watching TV

38. - 40. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.

What can be inferred from the passage?We should complain more when we are not pleased with services.
Our complaints can negatively impact those around us.
People tend to complain more when they are stressed.
Many people do not complain as they think it would not solve the problem.
Exposure to complaints on TV affects emotional people in particular.Which of the following could be the best title for the passage?
    Complaining: Nature or Nurture?
    Stop Complaining for a Healthier You
    Complaining: The Good and The Bad
    How to Deal with Complaints
    Why Complaining Prevents Stress


The origins of sociology and the coining of the term by Auguste Comte, one of the important thinkers in the history of the discipline, are usually traced back to 1839.
However, others trace intellectual concern for sociological issues much further back, and it could be argued that scholars have been thinking sociologically since the early history of humankind. 
However, it was not until about a half-century after Comte’s creation of the concept that sociology began to develop as a formal and clearly distinct discipline, primarily in Europe and the United States. 
It was another French thinker, Émile Durkheim, who in the late 1800s was responsible for distinguishing clearly the subject matter of sociology from neighbouring fields such as psychology and biology. 
Sociology became institutionalised in France, as well as in Germany, Great Britain, and the United States. 
While sociology in the United States did not take the early lead in the development of key ideas and theories, it did move strongly in the direction of institutionalisation.
Which of the following can be understood from the passage regarding the origins of sociology?
    It started to grow as a branch of social science after the introduction of the concept.Early scholars are not believed to have added anything to the field until the term was introduced.
    Durkheim was unable to define the distinctive features of the field from the others.Scholars were not interested in the field, so they disregarded it until it was institutionalised.
    Comte was the first thinker who distinguished the different aspects of the field from the others.

41. - 43. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.


The underlined word ‘coining’ is closest in meaning to ----.
    excavation
    negotiation
    invention
    variation
    rejection

The author’s primary purpose is to ----.
    introduce the sociological views of two thinkers
    compare aspects of sociology to other fields
    show the sociological differences in Europe
    inform us about the development of sociology
    explain the different aspects of sociology



Patient:
 I have totally lost my self-confidence because of
my failures at work. I feel rejected and isolated.
Psychologist:
 You shouldn’t be too hard on yourself. Your
problems might be related to the organisation you
work for, not your character or job performance.
Patient:
 ----
Psychologist:
 Well, if you want to grow in confidence you need
to change your perspective and focus on your
strengths rather than what others think about you.I really don't understand why most of my colleagues
burden me with their responsibilities.I always prioritise my own good when it comes to
relations at work.This is the problem. I always tend to blame myself, not
outside factors.In fact, some organisations arrange seminars to help
their employees work more effectively.I sometimes watch a movie or go for a walk to forget
about my problems.
44. - 48. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş
bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi
bulunuz.
44.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Josh:
 I’ve just read an article about a team of
researchers at MIT who analysed 126,000 stories
posted on social media between 2006 and 2017.
They found that lies spread more rapidly and
farther than facts.
Christie:
 ----
Josh:
 Actually the opposite. The typical person
spreading lies tended to have few followers and
showed little activity. What made false stories
popular was that they tended to be more exciting
than the truth.
Christie:
 Sounds interesting. I’ll remember this the next
time I see a story on social media.Do you think the research also explains why so many
of us are fooled by lies in the first place?So, Mark Twain was right when he said that “A lie
travels halfway around the world while the truth is still
putting its shoes on,” wasn’t he?Can we say that we shouldn’t trust the majority of the
stories posted on social media?Could it be because lies were being spread by popular
social media users?Did the researchers compare all those stories posted
on social media?
45.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
12
2023-YDT/İNGFrank:
 My first test in computer science is on Monday.
So, can you summarise memory since you’re the
expert?
Sue:
 Sure, just remember the term ‘memory’ is used a
bit loosely. A memory unit is the part where
information is stored. Technically, it can be either
of two things: RAM or ROM.
Frank:
 ----
Sue:
 RAM stores the programs and data you are using
in your current work session. When you turn off
your computer, the information in RAM is lost.
ROM stores the information your computer needs
to perform basic functions and run programs that
are built in your computer.
Frank:
 Thank you.So, RAM and ROM are two kinds of memory, then
what do the abbreviations stand for?I need to be able to explain them, so what is the
difference between RAM and ROM?Technically speaking, what are the distinct physical
features of these two memory types?So, can you briefly describe what happens if a
memory unit is used at its limits?What difference does it make if I upgrade one of these
units with a newer one?
46.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Amy:
 Have you seen the photo of the Yuncheng Salt
Lake in this week’s magazine? It’s gorgeous!
Pam:
 Nope. What makes it so beautiful?
Amy:
 ----
Pam:
 How’s that possible? How can it have such an
effect on the lake?
Amy:
 Actually, as the weather warms up, different
microorganisms flourish in different parts of the
lake, each giving the water its own distinctive
shade.The water is brightly coloured due to high
temperatures in the region.In fact, it is the third biggest sodium sulphate lake in
the world.The weather in that region is so hot that tourists hardly
come to stay there.Humans have been harvesting salt in this lake for
4,000 years.It is in the Shanxi province of northern China– known
as the Dead Sea of China.
47.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
13
2023-YDT/İNGPauline:
 Every time I go grocery shopping, I end up buying
far more than I intend or need to.
Jill:
 So do I. But I finally found the exact reason: It’s
our empty stomachs that are to blame.
Pauline:
 ----
Jill:
 Eating some fruit or nuts before heading to the
store might help. Then, going shopping will be
much easier to keep in check.It’s not only the hunger that plays a role, adverts can
have a big influence on our decisions while shopping.The same goes for shopping on the Internet. I also feel
like buying clothes that I don't need when I do online
shopping.For me, it’s not the case. There are too many
alternatives offered at stores, so the diverse choices
make me buy more.I think you’re completely right because so much of
what’s available looks extra-tempting when I’m hungry.But I often tend to buy cakes and biscuits even when
I’m not hungry. Their attractive packaging and
delicious taste always get me.
48.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)An investigation into the fish remains in the Sahara
Desert has revealed that humans living there 10,000
years ago were eating fish for dinner.An analysis of the humans that lived in the Sahara
Desert 10,000 years ago, based on their remains,
sheds light on how often these people ate fish for
dinner.According to an analysis on the fish remains in the
Sahara Desert, it has been found that the people
residing in this area 10,000 years ago used to
consume fish for dinner.According to a study on the diets of the humans living
in the Sahara Desert 10,000 years ago, it was
customary for those who lived in that area to consume
fish for dinner.According to a study on the fish remains in the Sahara
Desert, the residents of this area are known to have
been eating fish for dinner for the last 10,000 years.An examination of the fish remains in the Sahara
Desert, 10,000 years ago, indicated that fish was often
preferred for dinner by the residents of this area.
49. - 53. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en
yakın cümleyi bulunuz.
49.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
14
2023-YDT/İNGNo sooner had Isaac Newton received his university
degree, in 1665, then the plague came, which forced
everyone to leave Cambridge.As soon as Isaac Newton received his university
degree in 1665, people had to abandon Cambridge
because of the outbreak of the plague.Upon being forced to leave Cambridge due to the
plague in 1665, Isaac Newton received his university
degree.Before Isaac Newton finished university in 1665, the
plague had broken out in Cambridge and made people
leave the city.The plague forced everyone including Isaac Newton,
who would soon receive his university degree, to leave
Cambridge in 1665.It was 1665 when Isaac Newton had to leave
Cambridge with his university degree since the plague
afflicted everyone.With the huge growth in population and with the
development of larger and more efficient machines,
the ability of humans to influence their environment
has increased enormously.Population of humans has grown immensely, which
means both an increase in their ability to affect their
environment considerably and also the development of
bigger and more efficient machines.Due to the massive growth in population, much larger
and more efficient machines have been developed
and this has led humans to be able to influence their
environment extensively.There has been a great increase in the ability of
humans to have a huge impact on their nature as a
massive growth in the population has helped them
develop larger and more efficient machines.There has been a great deal of increase in humans’
capability to have an impact on their environment
thanks to the massive population growth and the
development of larger and more efficient machines.Humans have the capability to influence their nature
greatly thanks to the development of larger and more
efficient machines which are the products of the
immensely growing population.
50.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
51.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Although clouds vary enormously from day to day,
they can all be identified as one of ten basic types.Even though they belong to one of ten simple types of
clouds, cloud formations can dramatically change their
shapes from day to day.Identifying clouds as one of ten basic varieties is due
to the fact that they tend to vary quite a lot on a daily
basis.Despite belonging to one of ten basic varieties of
clouds, most clouds can change their shape quite a lot
on a day to day basis.The fundamental variations of clouds on a day to day
basis can be grouped into one of ten different cloud
types.Despite differing immensely on a daily basis, clouds
typically all belong to one of ten fundamental varieties.Rome’s military and administrative strength allowed
it to endure several crises until, finally, waves of
invaders brought about its fall.Rome could survive the attacks of invaders thanks
to its powerful army and governmental system;
however, several crises ultimately caused its fall.Although waves of invaders were able to make Rome
surrender after several crises, they eventually failed
to weaken Rome's military and administrative powers.If it had not been for Rome’s military and
administrative strength, it could not have survived
even until the attack of invaders.Rome was able to handle many crises thanks to the
power of its army and governmental system, yet it
ultimately collapsed as a result of the attacks of the
invaders.The invaders eventually succeeded to conquer Rome
after some crises no matter how powerful its military
and administration were.
52.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
53.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
15
2023-YDT/İNGA friend of yours is going to her high school
reunion party. She has just tried on some fancy
shoes and asks your opinion about them. You don’t
like them because you think the heels are far too
high. You suggest politely: ----You can’t even walk with these shoes on! If you buy
them, you’ll fall down and look foolish at the party.It's not worth buying new shoes for this occasion. You
already have several nice pairs at home.I think these might be a little bit too high for you. Why
don’t you try that pair over there?Why are you even going to this party if you don’t have
a suitable pair of shoes to wear?Let’s come back and try on these shoes later after
you’ve learned how to walk in heels.Your friend celebrated his birthday but you have
been busy and failed to wish him a happy birthday.
Afraid you’ve hurt his feelings, you want to extend
an appropriate apology to him, so you say: ----I’ve been terribly busy recently. I’m so sorry I forgot
your birthday. Could you forgive me?I’m so sorry I couldn't be there to eat your birthday
cake. What kind was it?If I kept a calendar, I could remember important events
like your birthday, don’t you think?I’m sorry that I have a life of my own. You’re always so
sensitive about such things, aren’t you?Well, it’s okay that I forgot your birthday this time
around. There’s always next year, right?
54. - 58. sorularda, verilen durumda söylenmiş
olabilecek sözü bulunuz.
54.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
55.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)One of your group mates is being lazy in preparing
the group project, which is due in five days. You
tried to drop some hints on collaborative work but
he just ignored those remarks. The other group
members asked you to warn him one last time, so
you say in a serious manner: ----Unless you’re willing to work, we’ll get really upset.We have someone else to help us out. So, you don’t
need to bother.Don’t worry. We won’t tell the teacher you’re not
working.We don’t get why you’re so lazy. Can’t you try harder?If you don’t help us with the project, you’ll be out and
fail the project.Your daughter is a bright high-school student and
also into vlog videos on the Internet. One day, she
comes up to you and says that she wants to leave
the school and become a full-time vlogger. You want
to show respect to her decisions and also you are
aware of the importance of education. So you say:
----You know what? There are many successful figures in
history with very little education background. I support
you on your decision.It’s perfectly fine to do the thing you love the most, but
your education cannot be put off. I think it’d be better if
you build up a balance between school and vlogs.I know assignments and presentations at school can
be challenging but being a vlogger is also not as easy
as it sounds.I’ve read an article about how much money vloggers
make and got shocked! I think it’s best to work
towards that ambition of yours.It’s your life, your decisions. We can arrange an online
education for you to improve your vlogs. You should
be the best at whatever you do.
56.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
57.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
16
2023-YDT/İNGYou have recently arrived at your host university
with a study-abroad program. You have made a
friend from Spain but you are not sure how to
pronounce her name. So you politely ask her: ----I’m sorry. Could you please tell me the exact
pronunciation of your name?Your name is so long and difficult to say, do you often
have problems with how people pronounce it?Are all Spanish names as melodic sounding as yours?Would you like me to teach you how to correctly
pronounce my name?Do you often get upset when people mispronounce
your name?
58.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Merchandising is the process by which goods are
produced in association with a media product,
which can then be sold to consumers. Many
successful films, such as Star Wars or Spiderman,
have greatly increased their revenues by licensing
the ideas, script, images or music from the film to
companies which will release products associated
with the film. Associated with Star Wars, for
instance, are toys, books, clothes and games. While
merchandising is not new and has been connected
to a range of artists in the past, the process is now
seen as central to promotion of media products
themselves. ---- For example, computer games have
toys and books associated with them and rock
groups sell T-shirts.There was an explosion of goods associated with the
rock group The Beatles in the 1960s.Merchandising is clearest in film, though other forms of
media seek to maximise revenues from their
successes in the same way.In a few cases, revenue from merchandising has
matched or even exceeded revenue from the original
media.When you promote a product too much, consumers
may become uninterested in buying the goods.Filmmaking is a collaborative process, but the nature
of the normal structure of how media is produced is
questioned.
59. - 63. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada
anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek
cümleyi bulunuz.
59.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Diğer sayfaya geçiniz.
17
2023-YDT/İNGAdolescence is an exciting time. It is also a time that
can be very confusing. Boys and girls become much
more interested in each other. ---- In fact, during
adolescence, most boys and girls care a lot about
what other adolescents think of them. They may also
be very concerned with how they fit into their world.
Often adolescents choose to spend time with their
friends rather than with their families.When it is time, boys grow facial hair, develop stronger
muscles, and their voices deepen.At the same time, they may worry about their
appearance, and they are sometimes easily
embarrassed.As adolescents grow emotionally, they begin to take on
new responsibilities and gain new freedoms.The fact that they act and think more independently
mean that they are on their way to becoming adults.Another change in the body during adolescence is the
development of the reproductive system.Most teenagers and some adults experience a skin
condition called acne. It is caused by changes
inside the body which occur naturally as a boy or
girl reaches puberty, or matures. At that time the
body produces more of chemicals called hormones.
Some of those hormones speed up the skin's
production of oil. ---- As the oil gland under a
blocked pore makes more oil, the pore swells up to
form a pimple.However, there are treatments for clearing up acne
and ways of preventing acne from getting worse.There is very little a person can do to prevent acne
aside from washing the skin with a mild soap.The extra oil dumps together with dead skin cells to
clog pores, or tiny openings in the skin.Some cases of acne are very mild and go away
without leaving any signs or scars.Acne lesions are commonly known as pimples and
they occur especially on the face and neck.
60.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)
61.
A)
B)
C)
D)
E)Wall paintings in ancient Egyptian tombs show that
the people of Africa have made and played musical
instruments for thousands of years. ---- Arabs
brought musical instruments and styles that became
part of the culture of North Africa, the western
savannah, and the eastern coast. European colonial
armies and missionaries introduced Western
instruments such as brass horns. Urban musicians
of modern Africa have adopted Western electric
instruments – guitar, bass, and synthesiser – to
create exciting new music. Yet from the dance halls
to the rural farmlands, many musicians still play the
traditional instruments of Africa.Over the centuries, the many invaders of Africa
introduced new instruments.The knowledge of crafting musical instruments has
been passed on to younger generations by the elderly.A key feature of African music is when instruments are
played together.African musicians have a long tradition of inventing
and making small handheld instruments.Most traditional musicians use their instruments to
create the distinctive sounds of African music.
62.

A major goal of psychology is to predict behaviour by understanding its causes. Making predictions is difficult in part because people vary and respond differently in different situations. 
Individual differences are the variations among people on physical or psychological dimensions.
---- Some people experience major negative events, such as severe physical injuries or the loss of significant others, without experiencing much depression, whereas other people experience severe depression for no apparent reason.
    For instance, although many people experience some symptoms of depression in their lives, the experience varies dramatically among people.
    Other important individual differences include intelligence, self-esteem, anxiety, aggression, and conformity.
    Because of the many individual variables that influence behaviour, it is impossible to predict who will become aggressive at school or at work.
    Likewise, people who go through similar painful experiences tend to show common patterns of behaviour.
    Another reason why it is easy to predict behaviour is that almost all human behaviour is determined by a combination of many factors.

Honesty and humility can help establish emotional connections with others, yet some people, to protect their ego, see these traits as weaknesses.
    Dürüstlük ve tevazu, başkalarıyla duygusal bağlar kurmayı sağlayan özelliklerdir ancak bazı insanlar egolarını koruma amacıyla bu özellikleri zayıflık olarak görür.
    Her ne kadar egolarını korumak isteyen bazı insanlar dürüstlük ve tevazuyu zayıflık olarak görse de bu özellikler başkalarıyla duygusal bağlar kurmayı sağlayabilir.
    Dürüstlük ve tevazu, başkalarıyla duygusal bağlar kurmayı sağlayabilse de bu özellikler bazı insanlar tarafından egolarını korumak için zayıflık olarak nitelendirilebilir.
    Bazı insanlar egolarını korumak için dürüstlük ve tevazuyu zayıflık olarak değerlendirir fakat bunlar, başkalarıyla duygusal bağlar kurmayı sağlayan özelliklerdir.
    Dürüstlük ve tevazu, başkalarıyla duygusal bağlar kurmayı sağlayabilir ancak bazı insanlar egolarını korumak için bu özellikleri zayıflık olarak görür.

64. - 69. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi bulunuz.


A study carried out in France has shown that listening to relaxing music before surgery was more effective at reducing anxiety than taking a sedative medication.
    Ameliyattan önce rahatlatıcı müzik dinlemenin endişeyi azaltmada sakinleştirici ilaç kullanmaktan daha etkili olduğu Fransa’da yapılan bir araştırmayla gösterilmiştir.
    Fransa’da yapılan bir araştırmada, ameliyattan önce sakinleştirici ilaç kullanmak yerine rahatlatıcı müzik dinlemenin endişeyi azaltmada daha etkili olduğu görülmüştür.
    Sakinleştirici ilaç kullanmaktansa rahatlatıcı müzik dinlemenin ameliyattan önce endişeyi azaltmada daha etkili olduğu Fransa’da yapılan bir araştırmayla ortaya konmuştur.
    Fransa’da yapılan bir araştırma, ameliyattan önce rahatlatıcı müzik dinlemenin endişeyi azaltmada sakinleştirici ilaç kullanmaktan daha etkili olduğunu göstermiştir.
    Ameliyattan önce sakinleştirici ilaç kullanmanın endişeyi azaltmada rahatlatıcı müzik dinlemekten daha etkili olduğunu Fransa’da yapılan bir araştırma göstermiştir.

The Greeks developed the notion that the Earth was a sphere on which humans lived, while the sky was a spherical dome that held the stars and rotated around the Earth.
    Yunanların geliştirdiği fikre göre, Dünya insanların üzerinde yaşadığı bir küre iken gökyüzü yıldızları tutan ve Dünya’nın etrafında dönen küresel bir kubbedir.
    Dünya’nın insanların üzerinde yaşadığı bir küre, gökyüzünün ise yıldızları tutan ve Dünya’nın etrafında dönen küresel bir kubbe olduğu fikri, Yunanlar tarafından geliştirilmiştir.
    Yunanlar tarafından geliştirilen fikir, Dünya’nın insanların üzerinde yaşadığı bir küre, gökyüzünün ise yıldızları tutan ve Dünya’nın etrafında dönen küresel bir kubbe olduğu yönündedir.
    Yunanlar, Dünya’nın insanların üzerinde yaşadığı bir küre, gökyüzünün ise yıldızları tutan ve Dünya’nın etrafında dönen küresel bir kubbe olduğu fikrini geliştirmişlerdi.
    Dünya’nın insanların üzerinde yaşadığı bir küre, gökyüzünün ise yıldızları tutarak Dünya’nın etrafında dönen küresel bir kubbe olduğu fikri Yunanlara aittir.


Since the estimated world population for 2050 is 9.7 billion, growing enough food to feed a rapidly increasing global population is already a pressing concern.
    2050 yılı için tahmin edilen dünya nüfusu 9,7 milyar olduğundan hızla artan küresel nüfusa yetecek kadar yiyecek üretilmesi hâlihazırda acilen ele alınması gereken bir meseledir.
    Dünya nüfusunun 2050 yılında 9,7 milyar olacağı tahmin edildiğinden hızla artan küresel nüfus için yeterli miktarda yiyecek üretmek hâlihazırda acil bir sorun haline gelmiştir.
    2050 yılında dünya nüfusunun tahminen 9,7 milyar olacak olması, hızla artan küresel nüfusa yetecek kadar yiyecek üretimini hâlihazırda önemli bir mesele hâline getirmiştir.
    Dünya nüfusu 2050 yılında tahminen 9,7 milyar olacaksa, hızla artan küresel nüfusa yeterli miktarda yiyecek üretilmesi konusu hâlihazırda acilen ele alınması gereken bir meseledir.
    Dünya nüfusunun 2050 yılında 9,7 milyar olacağı tahmin edilmiştir bu yüzden hızla artan küresel nüfus için yeterince yiyecek üretmek hâlihazırda acilen çözülmesi gereken bir sorundur.

The animal rights movement, which emerged in the 1970s, seeks to end the use of animals as sources of food and experimental subjects.
    Hayvanların besin kaynağı ve denek olarak kullanılmasını önlemeyi amaçlayan hayvan hakları hareketi 1970’lerde ortaya çıkmıştır.
    1970’lerde ortaya çıkan hayvan hakları hareketinin amacı, hayvanların besin kaynağı ve denek olarak kullanılmasına engel olmaktır.
    1970’lerde ortaya çıkan hayvan hakları hareketi, hayvanların besin kaynağı ve denek olarak kullanımını sonlandırmaya çalışmaktadır.
    Hayvanların besin kaynağı ve denek olarak kullanımını sonlandırmaya çalışan hayvan hakları hareketinin ortaya çıkışı 1970’lere dayanmaktadır.
    1970’lerde ortaya çıkmasından itibaren hayvan hakları hareketi, hayvanların besin kaynağı ve denek olarak kullanılmasını engellemeye çalışmaktadır.

There are different ways of identifying the quality of a digital camera, such as calculating the number of pixels captured in an image.
    Bir dijital kameranın yakaladığı görüntünün kalitesinin belirlenmesinde piksel sayısının hesaplanması gibi farklı yollar vardır.
    Dijital kameraların kalitesi, yakalanan görüntüdeki piksellerin sayısının hesaplanmasına göre farklı yollarla belirlenir.
    Bir dijital kameranın kalitesine göre yakalanan görüntüdeki piksellerin sayısını hesaplamanın farklı yolları vardır.
    Bir dijital kameranın kalitesini belirlemenin, yakalanan görüntüdeki piksellerin sayısının hesaplanması gibi farklı yolları vardır.
    Yakalanan görüntüdeki piksellerin sayısının hesaplanması gibi bir dijital kameranın kalitesini gösteren farklı yollar vardır.

İş dünyasında bilgi yönetimi genellikle kritik, stratejik ya da önemli sayılan bilginin korunması, paylaşılması ya da geliştirilmesi anlamlarına gelmektedir.
    Business world preserves knowledge which is deemed critical, strategic, or important and generally knowledge management covers the preservation, sharing or development of it.
    Knowledge management includes the preservation, sharing, and development of knowledge which is generally deemed critical, strategic, or important in the business world.
    In the business world, knowledge management commonly refers to the preservation, sharing, or development of knowledge that is deemed critical, strategic, or important.
    Knowledge in the business world is generally managed by the preservation, sharing, or development of it as it is deemed critical, strategic, or important.
    Knowledge management commonly includes the business world in which knowledge that is deemed critical, strategic, or important is preserved, shared or developed.

70. - 75. sorularda, verilen Türkçe cümleye anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz.

Çoğu gök bilimci Ay'ın 4,5 milyar yıl önce Mars büyüklüğünde bir asteroidin Dünya ile çarpışması sonucu oluştuğunu düşünmektedir.
    Most astronomers think that the collision of a Mars-sized asteroid with the Earth 4.5 billion years ago resulted in the formation of the Moon.
    Most astronomers agree that the Moon was formed when a Mars-sized asteroid collided with the Earth 4.5 billion years ago.
    Most astronomers think that the Moon was formed as a result of the collision of a Mars-sized asteroid with the Earth 4.5 billion years ago.
    Most astronomers agree that a Mars-sized asteroid collided with the Earth 4.5 billion years ago, which ultimately formed the Moon.
    Most astronomers think that the Moon, which was formed 4.5 billion years ago, was the result of the collision of a Mars-sized asteroid with the Earth.

Birçok etobur hayvanın keskin koku üreten salgı bezleri vardır ama kokarcaların kokusu o kadar ağırdır ki onlar bunu etkili bir silah olarak kullanabilir.
    The glands in many carnivores produce sharp scents, but skunks have such a heavy scent that it can function as an effective weapon.
    Most carnivores produce strong scents through their glands, but skunks’ scent is the heaviest one that can be used as a powerful weapon.
    Most carnivores have glands that produce strong scents, but skunks use their extremely heavy scents as an effective weapon.
    Many carnivores have glands that produce sharp scents, but skunks’ scent is so heavy that they can use it as an effective weapon.
    Many carnivores have sharp scents produced by their glands, but skunks’ scent is so heavy that they can use it as a powerful weapon.


MÖ 8000 civarında Afrika, Hindistan ve Avustralya’da avcılar tarafından kullanılan bumerang, ilk başlarda, hayvanlara, onları yaralamak ve yakalamak amacıyla fırlatılan ağır bir sopaydı.
    Because boomerang was a heavy stick thrown to injure and catch animals, it was originally used by the hunters in Africa, India and Australia as long as 8000 BCE.
    Boomerang was originally a heavy stick which the hunters in Africa, India and Australia used to throw at animals to injure and catch them in 8000 BCE.
    In about 8000 BCE, boomerang was first used by the hunters in Africa, India and Australia as a heavy stick not only to injure animals but also to catch them.
    Many hunters in Africa, India and Australia used boomerang as it was originally a heavy stick thrown to injure or catch animals around 8000 BCE.
    Used by the hunters in Africa, India and Australia around 8000 BCE, boomerang was originally a heavy stick thrown at animals to injure and catch them.

Beyin acıyı doğrudan algılamıyor olsa da acıyı algılayan zarlar, kan damarları ve kaslar ile çevrilidir ve bu da baş ağrısı yaşamamızın sebebidir.
    Although the brain does not sense pain directly, it is surrounded by membranes, blood vessels and muscles that do and that is the reason why we have headaches.
    The brain does not sense pain directly but the membranes, blood vessels and muscles surrounding it do, causing us to have headaches.
    We have headaches not because the brain senses pain directly, but because it is surrounded by membranes, blood vessels and muscles that sense pain.
    Though the brain cannot sense pain directly, we have headaches due to the pain in the membranes, blood vessels and muscles that surround our brain.
    The brain does not have a direct sense of pain, so our headaches are not due to the pain in the brain but in the membranes, blood vessels and muscles surrounding it.

Kısıtlı bir beslenme düzeni olan pandalar çoğunlukla bambu yerler ve bambu çok besleyici bir bitki olmadığı için pandaların yeterli enerji almak için yemek yemeye çok fazla vakit ayırmaları gerekir.
    Pandas spend a lot of time eating to get enough energy because their limited diet makes them eat primarily bamboo, which is not a very nutritious plant.
    Pandas have a limited diet as they mostly eat bamboo, which is not a very nutritious plant, and that is why they have to spend a lot of time eating to get enough energy.
    Having a limited diet, pandas mostly eat bamboo, and they have to devote a lot of time eating to get enough energy because bamboo is not a very nutritious plant.
    With their limited diet, pandas mostly feed on bamboo, which is not a very nutritious plant and cannot give pandas enough energy, so they devote a lot of time to eating.
    Pandas which mostly eat bamboo have a limited diet, and they have to get enough energy by spending a lot of time eating as bamboo is not a very nutritious plant.

75.

(I) The lie detector, or polygraph, was devised in the 1930s, but from the mid-1970s various psychologists conducted serious research into the lie detector and all condemned it. 
(II) In 1988, the Polygraph Protection Act prohibited US employers from requiring or requesting that employees be polygraphed. 
(III) However, in half of all American states, findings provided by the lie detector can still be admitted as evidence in legal cases. 
(IV) To be acceptable as a test, a lie detector must minimally fulfil a number of criteria, the first of which is to have a standardised method of administration. 
(V) Polygraphs are currently used throughout the world from Canada to Thailand, Israel to Taiwan, though their use is limited.

(I) The phrase ‘global warming’ has not been around long, but climate change, as it is also known, is nothing new. 
(II) In fact, it has been a constant throughout history. 
(III) Scientists are certain that this change has been caused by emissions produced by human activities. 
(IV) Earth’s climate today is very different from what it was 2 million years ago, let alone 10,000 years ago. 
(V) Since the beginnings of the most primitive life forms, this planet has seen many different climates, from the hot, dry Jurassic period of the dinosaurs to the bleak, frozen landscapes of the ice ages.IIIIIIIVV


76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan cümleyi bulunuz.


(I) For many years now, a group of scientists have been studying endangered northern right whales, whose habitat includes busy shipping lanes for the port of Boston. 
(II) In 2007, they deployed a network of seafloor recorders and automated listening buoys in Massachusetts Bay, which enabled them to compile a complete underwater noise budget. 
(III) Colour animations of the data show that the calls of right whales are destroyed as ships pass. 
(IV) In addition to right whales, noise drives many other marine animals to change their behaviour markedly – their calling, mating, and migration patterns. 
(V) Their social network is constantly disturbed, and therefore, unable to communicate, individual whales have trouble finding each other and spend more time on their own.IIIIIIIVV

(I) Every country has a national flag with a unique design that identifies it to other countries. 
(II) There are no international rules for flag design; each country can choose any pattern, though they are usually based on the country’s history or culture. 
(III) National flags first became widespread in the 19th century, but Denmark has the oldest national flag still in use, dating back as far as the 13th century. 
(IV) Most flags are rectangular in shape, but the proportions of the rectangle are not always the same. 
(V) However, this is not always the case – Nepal, for example, has a distinctive, non-rectangular flag, which looks like two triangles on top of each other.IIIIIIIVV

(I) Games have always tended to be one of the most significant forces driving the popular use of technology.
(II) On the other hand, there is ongoing research being conducted into the harmful psychological effects games have on people. 
(III) In 1972 many home users got their first ever taste of computing as something that could be experienced at home as well as at work, thanks to the appearance of the first game console: a home machine dedicated entirely to playing video games. 
(IV) The machine boasted a variety of simple games but suffered from poor marketing and failed to make much of an impact compared to a product also released in 1972.
(V) However, today, the console market is worth tens of billions of dollars, with hundreds of millions of machines around the world.IIIIIIIVV
