
1. - 4. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz.

01.c
In recent years, the growth of English has been further ---- by a startling expansion in the quantity and speed of international communication.
suppressed reversed accelerated excluded restricted 

02.e
The conditions ---- which speaking occurs play a major role ---- determining the degree of fluency a speaker may be capable of.
by / upon through / about of / at for / with under / in 


03.c
---- the challenging bombardment of continually changing and advancing technologies and programs, it is difficult for educators to feel competent in directing the uses of computers in their schools.
    In spite of 
    Regardless of 
    Due to 
    As opposed to 
    By means of


04.b
Compared to most other countries, curriculum and pedagogy in Russia ---- by an exceptional degree of continuity over time, and between the mid-1930s and the early 1990s, minor changes ---- incrementally through planned development.
    will be marked / had arisen 
    have been marked / arose 
    were marked / would have arisen 
    would be marked / have arisen 
    had been marked / are arising 



05.d
Which of the following sentences does not contain a reduced relative clause?
    The ice skater taking part in the show was from Australia.
    Any coins found on this site must be handed to the police.
    As they reach the end of their first years, children make specific attempts to imitate speech sounds they hear around them.
    Following the earlier morpheme order studies by Dulay and Burt, Krashen claimed we acquire language rules in a natural order.
    Those interested in learning English abroad can ask for further information from the coordinator.

06.c
In which of the following sentences the use of 'it' cannot be regarded as non-referential?
    It is about 100 miles to Boston. 
    It is never crowded at the Pontiac Hotel. 
    The last time I saw the newspaper, it was in the living room.
    It gets a little noisy, especially when everyone is warming up.
    It was a very blustery autumn day. 

07.e
Which of the following sentences includes a grammatical error because the phrasal verb is inseparable?
    Why did she turn your invitation down? 
    Can you look the opening times up on the website? 
    We walked along the beach, breathing the sea air in. 
    We’re going to bring the matter forward at the meeting. 
    I came an interesting article across last night. 

08.d
In the early 1980s, the world was introduced to the personal computer and it soon became a familiar household item.

Which of the following word-classes does not appear in the sentence?
    Preposition 
    Adjective 
    Determiner 
    Possessive pronoun 
    Adverb

09.e
Performative utterances do not report anything that can be regarded as true or false. 
If a person makes an utterance of this sort, we can say that he or she is doing something rather than merely saying something. 
That is, the uttering of the sentence is an action. 
In these sentences, the action is named by the verb, which is called performative verb.
With reference to the given information, which of the following sentences does not contain a performative verb?
      I promise to be there. 
      I warn you not to come any closer. 
      I suggest that you leave. 
      I order you to be quiet. 
      I see you can write well. 

10.a
  determiner + premodifier + head + postmodifier
Which of the following phrases has the above structure?
    A red car for boys 
    The beautifully dancing flag 
    Two-storey houses with a large balcony 
    Some relatively interesting ideas 
    Excellent books by the same author


11.c
A topic sentence states the main idea of a paragraph. It briefly indicates what the paragraph is going to be about.
It neither gives any specific details nor is too general.
According to the information above, which of the following can be the best topic sentence?
    The North American Catawba Indians see the rainbow as a bridge between heaven and Earth.
    A rainbow seen from an airplane is a complete circle. 
    Many cultures interpret rainbows in positive ways. 
    Rainbows appear only when the sun shines through rain.
    There is a belief that you can find a pot of gold at the end of a rainbow.


12.c
  Task
    Rewrite the author's meaning in your own words.
    Include all or almost all of the ideas that are in the original. 
    Change the sentence structure and substitute synonyms where possible to avoid plagiarism.

Which of the following are necessary to complete the given task?
      Quotation and Citation 
      Free-writing and Proofreading 
      Paraphrasing and Summarizing 
      Prewriting and Revising 
      Brainstorming and Clustering


13.a
A teacher asks his or her students to write an essay on one of the topics below:
     Think of a time when you achieved a personal goal. Write about the story of how you reached your goal.
     Suppose you woke up one morning to a world with no human beings around, no electricity, and no water. 
      Write about this experience for future generations.
     Think about an event that happened at school, which you will always remember. Write about what happened.

What kind of an essay does the teacher ask the students to write?
    Narrative 
    Process 
    Compare and Contrast 
    Cause and Effect 
    Argumentative



14. - 16. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre cevaplayınız.
The more pragmalinguistic and sociopragmatic knowledge a learner has and the more accurately the two are mapped onto each other, 
the more likely it is that the learner will be successful in cross-cultural communication. 
However, is it easier for some people to acquire this knowledge than for others? 
In other words, is there a predisposition, even an aptitude, for successful cross-cultural performance? 
Because much pragmalinguistic competence is reinforced by general L2 knowledge, learners with a high L2 aptitude often have an easier time building their pragmalinguistic competence. 
Sociopragmatic competence, on the other hand, has much to do with interpersonal relations, understanding why people react the way they do, and fundamentally caring about what other people think.
Some learners are extremely good at establishing a friendly relationship despite limited general L2
competence, mostly because they interact in a way that is felt to be positive and engaging. 
For example, Richard Schmidt’s case study using a native speaker of Japanese, Wes, in 1983, showed that despite substantial
gaps in his general command of English, Wes was quite successful in his English-language interactions thanks to his polite manner.

14.c
It is clear from the passage that people can be quite successful in cross-cultural communication if ----.
    they have an innate, natural predisposition towards establishing harmonious relationships with speakers of their first language 
    their general L2 knowledge is sufficient enough to communicate effectively, irrespective of certain personality traits
    their pragmalinguistic and sociopragmatic knowledge are closely intertwined with each other
    their L2 aptitude is high enough to enable them to engage in interactions using the target language
    they have developed pragmalinguistic competence despite lacking sociopragmatic competence
 
15.e
According to the passage, those with a high L2 aptitude ----.
    tend to have few problems with sociopragmatic competence
    can easily develop sociopragmatic and pragmalinguistic competence at the same time
    think that sociopragmatic competence is not as essential as pragmalinguistic competence
    are utilized in studies to answer questions about pragmalinguistic competence
    tend to acquire pragmalinguistic competence with less effort

16.d
The author gives Wes, whose first language is Japanese, as an example in order to ----.
    prove that one can face several communication problems while speaking a foreign language if he or she does not have a high L2 aptitude
    reveal that equal blending of sociopragmatic and pragmalinguistic knowledge is required if one aims to improve his or her communicative skills
    show that Japanese people are highly competent in establishing effective interpersonal relations and thus developing sociopragmatic competence 
    stress the importance of developing social skills such as displaying favourable behaviours, which help to communicate competently in the target language
    highlight that pragmalinguistic competence is relatively easier to develop than sociopragmatic competence


17.e
Judith: – When we talk about someone as being a fluent speaker of French or when we say she speaks the language fluently, what do we mean by that?
Patrick: – If you ask me, for someone who speaks a language with a certain speed, we can say this person is a fluent speaker.
Judith: – Aren't there any criteria other than speaking fast?
Patrick: – ----
Judith: – Now I get it, pausing is equally important.
Which of the following completes the dialogue?
Yes, but even proficient speakers need to stop from time to time to draw breath.
In fact, in terms of how listeners rate a speaker’s fluency, the frequency of pausing is more important than the length of the pauses.
No, for example, abnormally fluent speakers such as horse-race commentators hardly ever hesitate and take only minimal pauses for breath.
Yes, speakers use a number of tricks to disguise pauses with pause fillers like uh, um and er.
Yes, pauses, which should be used appropriately, determine the degree of the speaker’s fluency.

18.c
Maggie: – I'm frustrated by my students’ overuse of dictionaries, especially electronic dictionaries.
Steven: – I had the same problem in the past. But I found a way to show them when dictionary use is acceptable and when it is not useful.
Maggie: – Really? Will you share your method with me?
Steven: – ----
Which of the following completes the dialogue?
    We should be sympathetic to our students’ desire to understand every word since most people learning a foreign language have such a tendency.
    The most useful dictionaries for teachers to use are advanced learners' dictionaries that include example sentences, as well as information about the form and use of words.
    When students encounter an unknown word, they can be encouraged to guess its meaning based on the sentence it belongs to, otherwise they can use their dictionaries to learn its meaning.
    They need to understand that if they rely heavily on dictionaries when they ought to be listening, they lose the benefit of hearing English spoken naturally.
    Electronic dictionaries are useful when students are looking for a word they don't know, but these dictionaries give very little information about how to use a word.


19.e
Carole: – Can you say that a particular approach to language learning leads to a better learning process?
Andrew: – ----
Carole: – But all approaches share the same ultimate objective, which is to improve students' learning process.
Andrew: – However, some may promote grammatical knowledge, while others enhance communicative knowledge.
          Therefore, the exact need of a student is crucial for choosing the right approach.
Which of the following completes the dialogue?
    The students’ learning styles influence teachers’ decisions about the way to teach as they learn best when they get used to having a particular instruction.
    The methodological decision is critical, but what's more important is how the preferred approach is applied.
    I don't think there is a perfect approach, because all approaches complement one another by minimising their weaknesses.
    The approach that puts the learners in the centre of the learning process and encourages them to be autonomous seems to be more effective.
    Different approaches may improve special language skills, and each may also create diverse qualities of language knowledge.

20.b
Physical as well as symbolic tools are artefacts created by human cultures over time and are made available to succeeding generations, which can modify these artefacts before passing them on to future generations.
Which of the following is a restatement of the given sentence?
    Artefacts created by human cultures over time are both physical and symbolic tools, and they are transferred to later generations that need to modify them before giving them up to future generations.
    Artefacts, which are both physical and symbolic tools, are gradually created by human cultures and are transferred to the following generations, which may alter them before they are handed down to future generations.
    Future generations have a responsibility to adopt and further develop physical and symbolic tools called artefacts, which were created by previous generations over time.
    Human cultures, over a long period of time, create physical and symbolic tools referred to as artefacts, and they pass them on to next generations, which may modify or keep them in their initial forms.
    Artefacts, which have long been created both physically and symbolically by human cultures, are important for coming generations that have to hand them down to future generations.

21.d
Assessment should not be a diagnosis for success or failure, but a means of determining the needs and goals of children.
Which of the following is a restatement of the given sentence?
    Assessment can help us recognise children’s needs and goals, but whether they succeed or fail should also be questioned.
    Assessment should be based on the needs and goals of children, and it should also reflect their success or failure.
    Assessment can be used to detect whether children are succeeding or failing rather than to define their needs and goals.
    Assessment should be a way of discovering children’s needs and goals instead of serving as a tool for finding out whether they succeed or fail.
    In order to assess children’s success or failure effectively, one should first realise their needs and goals.


22.b
Because of the complexity of second language acquisition, it is not possible to investigate it from a single perspective. 
Research in second language varies according to the circumstances under which the research is conducted. 
Circumstances vary firstly in relation to the context in which second language acquisition is taking place.
---- Secondly, the circumstances will also vary depending on whether the language being learned is a second or foreign language.
Thirdly, they may vary according to the age and other characteristics of the learners.
Which of the following completes the paragraph?
    There is not a single research approach for the study of all second language acquisition phenomena.
    Research on language acquisition performed in natural environments will be different from that conducted in the classroom.
    Information on second language acquisition may be gathered through a variety of means such as observation, testing and interviews.
    The study of the phenomena associated with second language learning must necessarily be multifaceted and multidisciplinary.
    Second language acquisition research should take account of knowledge and research methodologies from areas such as linguistics and psychology.


23.a
One of the most impressive language developments in the early school years is the astonishing growth of vocabulary. 
Many words are acquired in early childhood, when the repetition of ordinary events and experiences provides frequent exposure to a limited number of words.
Children enter school with the ability to understand and produce hundreds or even a few thousand words.
Therefore, vocabulary grows at a rate between several hundred and more than a thousand words a year, depending mainly on how much and how widely children read. 
---- Dee Gardner states that reading a variety of text types is an essential part of vocabulary growth.
Which of the following completes the paragraph?
The kind of vocabulary growth required for school success is likely to come from both reading for assignments and reading for pleasure, whether narrative or non-fiction.
The importance of reading for vocabulary growth is seen when observant parents report a child using a new word but mispronouncing it in a way that suggests it has been encountered only in written form.
In both the spoken and written language at school, such words as homework and workbook appear more frequently in situations where their meaning is either immediately or gradually revealed.
As children develop more sophisticated metalinguistic awareness, learning to read gives a major boost to this aspect of language development.
Seeing words represented by letters and other symbols on a page leads children to a new understanding that language has form as well as meaning.


24.c
(I) Extensive observations of parents and children show that parents tend to focus on meaning rather than form when they correct children's speech. 
(II) They may correct an incorrect word choice, an incorrect statement of the facts, or a rude remark, but they do not often react to errors, particularly grammatical errors, that do not interfere with communication. 
(III) The variation in the extent to which parents correct their children's speech is based partly on the children's age and the parents' social and educational background. 
(IV) What this tells us is that children cannot depend on consistent corrective feedback in order to learn the basic structure (the word order, the grammatical morphemes, the intonation patterns, etc.) of their language. 
(V) Fortunately, they are able to acquire the accurate form of the language without this kind of explicit feedback.
Which of the sentences in the given paragraph is irrelevant, violating its unity and coherence?
I II III IV V


25.d
(I) A curriculum is a dynamic system of interconnected, interrelated, and overlapping processes. 
(II) The three main curricular processes are planning, enacting, and evaluating. 
(III) These processes are in play at every curricular level, whether it is a lesson, unit, course or program. 
(IV) At the lesson level, a teacher plans complete and inclusive lessons for the class. 
(V) As they are carried out, they can result in an array of curriculum products such as syllabuses, lesson plans and assessment instruments.
Which of the sentences in the given paragraph is irrelevant, violating its unity and coherence ?
I II III IV V


26.e
Which of the following types of poem deals in an idealised way with shepherds and rustic life?
    Ballad 
    Epistle 
    Didactic 
    Lyric 
    Pastoral

27.a
Which of the following movements in theatre is Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot known for?
    Absurdist theatre 
    Epic theatre 
    Realism 
    Kitchen-sink drama 
    Futurism 

28.d
Which of the following is a form of fantasy in which facts, assumptions, or hypotheses form the basis, by logical extrapolation, of adventures in the future, in other dimensions in time, or on other planets?
    Gothic novel 
    Myth 
    Legend 
    Science-fiction 
    Metafiction 

29.b
    Sea nymphs hourly ring the knell:
    Ding-dong.
    Hark! Now I hear them.
    Ding-dong, bell.
Which of the following is an example of onomatopoeia in the poem Full Fathom Five by William Shakespeare?
    Bell 
    Ding-dong 
    Knell 
    Sea nymphs 
    Hark 


30. c
Which of the following is the part of a work of literature in which the audience is given the essential background information?
    Rising action 
    Falling action 
    Exposition 
    Climax 
    Resolution



31.a
Which of the following is not written by Charles Dickens?
    The Picture of Dorian Gray 
    Oliver Twist 
    A Tale of Two Cities 
    Hard Times 
    Great Expectations 

32.e
Which of the following author-work pairs belongs to the Age of Reason?
    George Bernard Shaw - Pygmalion 
    Thomas Hardy - Far from the Madding Crowd 
    Geoffrey Chaucer - The Canterbury Tales 
    James Joyce - Ulysses 
    Alexander Pope - Essay on Man 

33.c
Which property of human language concerns the fact that there is no end to the novel utterances humans can produce?
    Duality 
    Arbitrariness 
    Creativity 
    Cultural transmission 
    Displacement

34.d
For which of the following purposes is Minimal Pair Test conducted in phonological analysis?
To learn the place of articulation of the phonemes in a word
To find out whether the consonant phonemes in a word are voiced or voiceless
To learn the manner of articulation of the phonemes in a word
To determine the phonemes of a particular language 
To understand which organs in the vocal tract serve to produce a particular phoneme

35.a
Which of the following word-formation rules is used to produce such words as "brunch, motel, smog, and cranapple"?
    Blending 
    Clipping 
    Generification 
    Abbreviation   
    Back-formation 

36.d
Which of the following sentences does not have a structural ambiguity?
    Old men and women were accompanied by the staff. 
    I know a man with a daughter who has already applied to join us.
    Two hours later, he decided on the boat. 
    The hot sun melted the ice. 
    Smoking cigarettes can be sickening.


37.b
At Christmas, Jane 'gave' her brothers wonderful gifts and they all 'received' them with joy.
Which semantic relationship is exemplified by the underlined words in the given sentence?
    Homonymy 
    Relational oppositeness 
    Hyponymy 
    Anomaly 
    Gradable antonymy 

38.e
Which of the following cannot be described as a characteristic of a vernacular variety?
    It is the most colloquial variety in a person’s linguistic repertoire.
    It refers to an ethnic or tribal language used in a multilingual speech community.
    It is often used for a relatively narrow range of informal functions.
    It is the language of solidarity between people from the same social or cultural group.
    It is generally written and has undergone some degree of regularisation or codification.

39.a
Paul: – I don’t think I can manage the task alone. Can you help me?
Sarah: – Why not?
What is the function of the question asked by Sarah in the given dialogue?
    Responding positively to a suggestion 
    Asking for permission 
    Seeking another’s opinion 
    Challenging another’s opinion 
    Making a suggestion



40.e
Patients have trouble in reading words on a phonetic basis; that is, they are unable to segment letters. 
It is usually the case that the full range of normal reading skills has never been present. 
Visual processing and letter identification are adversely affected. 
For example, patients might read ‹love› as though it were loave, and ‹head› as heed.
Which of the following language disorders is described in the given paragraph?
    Broca's aphasia 
    Dysgraphia 
    Anomia 
    Wernicke's aphasia 
    Dyslexia 

41.d
     New material is presented through dialogues.
     Vocabulary is limited and is introduced within a context.
     Mastering good pronunciation is emphasized from the beginning.
     Grammatical points are taught through examples and drills.
Which of following methods has the principles listed above?
    The Grammar-Translation Method 
    The Direct Method 
    Total Physical Response 
    The Audio-Lingual Method 
    Communicative Language Teaching



42.d
    Methods               Materials & Techniques
    X                      Sound-Colour Charts, Word Charts, Fidel Charts, Self-Correction Gestures, Structured Feedback
    Y                      Reflective Listening, Small Group Tasks, Recording Students' Conversation, Transcription
Which of the following completes the table correctly?

    X                       Y
    The Silent Way          Task-based Language Teaching 
    Desuggestopedia         Community Language Learning 
    The Silent Way          Content-based Instruction 
    The Silent Way          Community Language Learning 
    Desuggestopedia         Task-based Language Teaching 





43.c
---- consists of quickly running one's eyes across a whole text for its gist. 
It gives the reader the advantage of being able to predict the purpose of the passage, the main topic, and possibly some of the supporting ideas.
---- refers to quickly searching for a piece of information, such as a name, date or place in a text. The purpose is to extract specific information.
Which of the following completes the paragraph correctly?
Bottom-up processing / Top-down processing 
Inductive reasoning / Deductive reasoning 
Skimming / Scanning 
Inferring / Interpreting 
Semantic mapping / Lexical parsing

44.a
 Students read large amounts of material which is within their level of comprehension.
 The teacher encourages students to choose what they want to read and to read for pleasure.
 Learners’ overall language proficiency (e.g., spelling, grammar, vocabulary, and text structure) is enhanced.
Which of the following reading types owns the features listed above?
    Extensive reading 
    Interactive reading 
    Perceptive reading 
    Intensive reading 
    Strategic reading 

45.e
In which of the following options are the learning style and its definition wrongly matched?
    Global-oriented: The learner prefers strategies such as guessing, which help him or her focus on the big picture.
    Analytic: The learner prefers strategies such as contrastive analysis, rule learning, and dissecting words and phrases.
    Inductive: The learner prefers to start with examples and to make generalizations about the patterns in the examples.
    Auditory: The learner prefers to practice aloud, listen to lectures and audiotapes, and learn by hearing.
    Visual: The learner shows a preference for demonstrations and physical activities involving bodily movement.



46.d
A blueprint is a detailed plan that provides the basis for developing an entire test.
According to the definition given above, which of the following is not taken into consideration when creating a blueprint?
    The number of the tasks 
    The sequence of the tasks 
    The relative importance of the tasks 
    Washback effect of the tasks 
    Task specifications 

47.c
Which of the following syllabuses is organized around communicative acts such as introducing oneself and other people, exchanging personal information, giving commands, and apologizing?
    Content-based syllabus 
    Structural syllabus 
    Notional-functional syllabus 
    Lexical syllabus 
    Genre-based syllabus 

48.d
For young learners' classes, which of the suggested activities does not match with the given intelligence type?
    Bodily-kinaesthetic intelligence / Use the alarm clock and tell me when you wake up in the morning
    Visual-spatial intelligence / Describe what you see in the poster
    Interpersonal intelligence / Work in groups of 3 and prepare a travel brochure
    Intrapersonal intelligence / Now imitate me 
    Logical-mathematical intelligence / List the body parts and categorise them



49.b
David:  The zookeeper holded the baby rabbits and feeded them. 
Based on the sentence David makes, what could be said about his use of English?
    David cannot produce sentences that are appropriate to the context in which they occur.
    David overgeneralizes a structural rule used for specific language items.
    David has not been able to develop discourse competence.
    David cannot remember new lexical items because they do not carry an association to familiar meanings.
    David cannot convey messages and negotiate meanings.


50.e
Mrs Thomas: – How did you get this book?
Hakan:      – I library went.
Which of the following is the reason why the native speaker of Turkish makes the exemplified grammatical error in English?
      Hypercorrection 
      Code-switching 
      Fossilization 
      Underextension 
      Interference



