(2024-YDS/1) - 24 MART 2024

1 - 6: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the space.
5. Psychologists believe friendships ---- many different types of associations, from casual relationships to more intimate, collaborative, and enduring bonds.
A  comprise dispel constrain contend allocate


7 - 16: For these questions, choose the best word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s).
8. The world’s first cities appear ---- in regions where climate and soil allowed the land to provide an abundance of plant and animal life that would be necessary ---- larger populations.
to have arisen / to support
arising / supporting 
to arise / to have supported 
being arisen / to be supported 
having arisen / being supported
A

17 - 21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage.
22 - 26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage.

27 - 36: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the given sentence.
27.
----; however, televised concerts and free outdoor concerts in Hyde Park and Covent Garden, have greatly increased its popularity.
Works of opera are always performed in the original language at the Royal Opera House
Opera has always been regarded to have a somewhat elitist reputation in Britain
London houses three permanent opera companies and numerous smaller opera groups
Mainstream, obscure, traditional, and innovative music are all to be found in profusion in England
Britain is a major centre for the classical recording industry, which supports a large community of musicians.

DOĞRU CEVAP: B 


37 - 42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in English, and the most accurate English translation of the sentences in Turkish.
42. Doğada gördüğünüz belirli bir yabani mantarın kimliğinden emin değilseniz, onu tüketmemelisiniz, çünkü zehirli bir mantarı yemek hızlı bir biçimde karaciğer yetmezliğine ve sonunda ölüme yol açabilir.
Given that a poisonous mushroom can cause liver failure and eventually death, you must not consume a wild mushroom you see in nature if you are not sure about the identity of that particular mushroom.
You should not consume a wild mushroom that you see in nature even if you are certain about the identity of that particular mushroom because you can have liver failure and eventually die due to a poisonous mushroom.
If you are not certain about the identity of a particular wild mushroom that you see in nature, you should not consume it as eating a poisonous mushroom can quickly lead to liver failure and eventually death.
A wild mushroom that you see in nature can be poisonous and quickly lead to liver failure and eventually death; therefore, unless you are sure about the identity of that particular mushroom, you should not consume it.
When you see a particular wild mushroom in nature, you should be certain about its identity if you want to consume it as, when eaten, a poisonous mushroom can quickly lead to liver failure and eventually death.
DOĞRU CEVAP: C 

43 - 46: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
47 - 50: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
51 - 54: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
55 - 58: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
59 - 62: Answer these questions according to the passage below
63 - 67: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the dialogue.

67.
Amanda:   Are you aware of the danger of not being considered to be consumers anymore but just products in a contemporary world?
Richard:  I don’t get what you’re saying. How can this happen?
Amanda:  Think about an online app that you listen music to. When you select a few songs you like, the app creates a playlist of similar music for you based on that input. 
        Subsequently, you start seeing news about the same artists on different apps and end up buying their albums or concert tickets.
Richard:  ----
Amanda:  Certainly yes, it is obvious that our activities and behaviour are tracked by every app on our phones.

You're right, this online tracking sounds dangerous indeed, but along with its disadvantages, it has some advantages too, doesn't it?
Are you suggesting that apps are selling our data to one another to influence our purchases by controlling what we come across online?
I think a person can learn to protect himself or herself by using internet more responsibly, don't you think?
Can I protect my personal data from such apps by not accepting cookies, or am I too late to do this?
Aren’t there any laws concerning personal privacy online? How can they share my data without my permission?
DOĞRU CEVAP: B


68 - 71: For these questions, choose the best rephrased form of the given sentence.
70.
Cuba represents an incredible opportunity for the regional ecotourism sector as a whole, but a possible threat to established ecotourism destinations in the Caribbean and Mexico because of its high potential.

With its great potential, Cuba offers a phenomenal opportunity for the entire regional ecotourism sector, but this could potentially threaten long-standing ecotourism hubs in the Caribbean and Mexico.
Cuba’s emergence as an attractive destination for the entire regional ecotourism sector as a whole may unintentionally disrupt the substantial appeal of established ecotourism hotspots in the Caribbean and Mexico.
Despite its growing appeal as a potential asset for the regional ecotourism sector as a whole, Cuba’s high potential may pose challenges to established ecotourism heavens in the Caribbean and Mexico.
While the regional ecotourism sector promotes Cuba as a promising opportunity for the region as a whole, its widespread appeal could undermine entrenched ecotourism destinations in the Caribbean and Mexico.
The regional ecotourism sector in its entirety sees potential in Cuba, but its considerable appeal may pose a serious problem for the established ecotourism destinations in the Caribbean and Mexico.

DOĞRU CEVAP: A




72 - 75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the passage.

73.
If there is any food group that people have a love-hate relationship with, it is fats, oils, and sweeteners. 
On the one hand, these foods play a vital role in our enjoyment of what we eat. 
Fats and oils give a creaminess, richness, and crispiness to foods. 
Sweeteners also satisfy a universal and natural craving. 
On the other hand, the pleasure that fats, oils, and sweeteners bring can come at a cost.
---- They also have other health disadvantages. 
Too much of the wrong kinds of fats and oils can increase the blood cholesterol level, which can increase risk for cardiovascular disease. 
Sugar and highly sweetened foods are also high in calories and provide few nutrients. For that reason, 'empty
calories' is a term often used to describe sweeteners or foods rich in them.

Making sure fats, oils, and sweeteners play the proper role in diet involves knowing more about them and what foods are rich in them.
These foods are generally high in calories, making it difficult for someone who eats a lot of them to maintain a healthful weight.
Generally, sweeteners are often referred to as having empty calories because they contain few or no vitamins or nutrients.
According to health specialists, it is acceptable to consume these foods as long as they are eaten sparingly.
Trans fats tend to increase cholesterol levels and therefore, should be eaten in only limited amounts.

DOĞRU CEVAP: B 




76 - 80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant sentence in the passage.
(I) After the studies of ancient Greek figures such as Ptolemy, there was virtually no progress in astronomy for over one thousand years, and during this time many of the Greek texts had been lost in Europe. 
(II) But in the 12th century Arab translations found their way to Europe, mainly via Islamic Spain. 
(III) Then in the 14th century Ibn al-Shatir, working in Damascus, improved Ptolemy’s model by modifying his epicycles and deleting his equant. 
(IV) However, Copernicus acknowledged that his idea of a spinning Earth in a heliocentric universe was not new but proposed by Aristarchus. 
(V) Interestingly, his system was very much like Copernicus’ later system, but with the Earth, not the Sun, at the centre.
I II III IV V
          D











