(2024-YDS/2) - 3 KASIM 2024

1 - 6: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the space.

4. The social benefits of technologies are ---- distributed across the United States as there are still rural communities and individuals with disabilities facing out-of-reach costs or lacking access to products that meet their needs.
undeniably invariably unevenly irreversibly inseparably

DOĞRU CEVAP: C 

7 - 16: For these questions, choose the best word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s).
16.
During the early periods in northern China, wheat seems to have been treated as a crop of desperation ---- a culinary delight, and was grown in an attempt to tackle starvation.
on the basis of 
by means of 
with reference to 
as a result of 
rather than
DOĞRU CEVAP: E


17 - 21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage.
22 - 26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage.
27 - 36: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the given sentence.


27. 
Given that social norms are not absolute and compliance to norms is rarely total, ----.
people base their choices and values on social norms, not simply on their view of what benefits them 
internalisation of social norms plays an essential role in a person’s identity development 
it is usual for community members to diverge from social norms under certain circumstances 
humans have a natural sense of right and wrong that helps them formulate social norms 
most of us typically conform to these prevailing social norms in order to avoid social rejection
DOĞRU CEVAP: C 


37 - 42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in English, and the most accurate English translation of the sentences in Turkish.

40. 
İkinci bir dil öğrenmek uzun ve karmaşık bir süreçtir çünkü ana dilinizin sınırlarının ötesine ulaşmanız ve yeni bir kültürü benimsemek için farklı bir düşünme yöntemi geliştirmeniz gerekmektedir.
Because you are required to reach beyond the confines of your native language by developing a different way of thinking to embrace a new culture, learning a second language is a long and complex process.
Since you have to reach beyond the confines of your native language to devise a different way of thinking while embracing a new culture, learning a second language is a long and complex process.
Learning a second language, which is a long and complex process, requires you to reach beyond the confines of your native language and develop a different way of thinking in order to embrace a new culture.
Learning a second language is a long and complex process as you have to reach beyond the confines of your native language and develop a different way of thinking to embrace a new culture.
Learning a second language is a long and complex process through which you have to reach beyond the confines of your native language and devise a different way of thinking so that you can embrace a new culture.
D

43 - 46: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
47 - 50: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
51 - 54: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
55 - 58: Answer these questions according to the passage below.

59 - 62: Answer these questions according to the passage below.
63 - 67: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the dialogue.
65.
Sylvia:  Did you know that music therapy was established as a profession in the US in the 1950s?
Robert:  Interesting! It sounds a bit late, doesn’t it?
Sylvia:  ----
Robert:  That makes sense now. You know, people couldn’t have discovered the therapeutic effect of music that late. Then what you’re referring to is its formal recognition in the 1950s.
Sylvia:  Yeah! Probably because around that time, methodical research expanded, as well as the formulation of theories.

But today, it is practised worldwide as an extremely varied and flexible profession in many fields, like special education and rehabilitation.
As a matter of fact, people suffering from severe impairments seemed to show noticeable improvement when treated with music.
Actually, the popularity of music therapy led to a dramatic increase in the number of its practitioners.
As ancient people believed that music had a magical power, they didn't consider it as a treatment method.
Right, but professionals from several disciplines had already been using music while working with various populations.
E



68 - 71: For these questions, choose the best rephrased form of the given sentence.
69. The use of antibiotics for spraying crops has increased exponentially in recent years in the US, with streptomycin predominantly used to control the bacterial disease that jeopardises apple and pear orchards.

In order to spray crops, antibiotics have been increasingly employed in recent years in the US, but apple and pear orchards are still at risk of serious harm from bacterial disease despite the heavy use of streptomycin.
Streptomycin is one of the most commonly used antibiotics to spray crops in the US, where bacterial disease, which cannot be controlled in recent years, has struck apple and pear orchards.
There has recently been a substantial increase in the use of antibiotics to spray crops in the US, however, without streptomycin, which is extensively employed to combat bacterial disease, apple and pear orchards would be destroyed.
Streptomycin, which is intensely used to combat the bacterial disease that damages apple and pear orchards, has been widely blamed for the sharp increase in the use of antibiotics for spraying crops in recent years in the US.
In recent years, a dramatic increase has been experienced in the exploitation of antibiotics to spray crops in the US, and among them is streptomycin, which is being largely used to control the bacterial disease that threatens apple and pear orchards.
E


72 - 75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the passage.
72.
Despite increased ecological awareness present within the diving community, the careful management of divers is extremely important.
Although aware of the fragility of the underwater environment, an underwater holiday maker still has human curiosity and the desire to make the 45-minute experience as worthwhile as possible.
---- Clearly, the potential stress caused by such an event must be avoided wherever possible, but the relative invisibility of such an occurrence to all but the participants makes it difficult to control.

This leads to instances such as that reported at Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, in March 1999, when an estimated 30 divers were chasing one turtle.
The most obvious method for doing so is to limit the numbers of divers at any one site, though this requires the establishment of thresholds.
A further problem is the fact that the vast majority of diving occurs within only 0.025% of the marine environment, i.e. around coral reefs.
When we compare the marine ecosystems between the 1900s and 2000s, the gloomy state of affairs in the last century becomes evident.
In addition, most divers now demand a sensitive environmental operation from the dive companies themselves.
DOĞRU CEVAP: A


76 - 80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant sentence in the passage.

77.
(I) Until about a century ago, it was thought that not much lived in the deep sea – with its average depth of
around 3.5 km, crushing pressures, and permanent darkness, few people bothered looking there. 
(II) Deep sea is home to many creatures, from snails covered in
metal plates to hairy crabs having unusual adaptations that help them to survive with no sunlight and in water
temperatures that range from boiling to freezing. 
(III) But today’s scientists have ditched the old ideas of a deep,
empty ocean and flat, featureless seabed. 
(IV) They are keen to take a closer look beneath the waves, and the
latest generation of research equipment is opening up
the depths like never before. 
(V) New technology is helping scientists uncover the oceans’ vital role in global
climate and find bizarre creatures that offer clues about
the origins of life on Earth.
I II III IV V
DOĞRU CEVAP: B
