Hey!
Hallo!

    Guten Morgen
    Guten Nachmittag
    Guten Abend
    Gute Nacht

		Wie geht es dir heute?                        How are you doing today?  (neler yapıyorsun bugün?)
					Mir geht es gut                         I'm doing good (iyidir)
            
		Wie ist/war dein Tag?                         How is/was your day (going)? (günün nasıl geçer/geçti)
					Mein Tag ist/was gut                    (my day is/was) good 			benim günüm iyi/iyiydi      der tag != die nacht
					Mein Tag war so anstrengend             My day was so tiring 			günüm çok yorucuydu     
					Ich habe den ganzen Tag gelernt         I studied all day long 			tüm gün boyunca ders çalıştım
					Ich habe den ganzen Tag gearbeitet      I worked all day long 			tüm gün boyunca çalıştım
					Hast du dich ausreichend ausgeruht?     did you rest enough? 			yeterince dinlendin mi?
						Ja, ich habe mich ausreichend ausgeruht          yes, I rested enough 			yeterince dinlendim
						Nein, ich habe mich nicht genug ausgeruht        no, I didnt rest enough 		yeterince dinlenmedim
            sich ausruhen - to rest                

					es war ein anstrengender Tag              It was a busy day 		  	meşgul bir gündü
					Heute war ich so beschäftigt              Today i was so busy 			bugün meşguldüm
					es war gut                                It was good		        		iyiydi
					es war stressig                           It was stressful 			    stresliydi
					es war so anstrengend                     It was so tiring 			    çok yorucuydu
					ich hatte einen guten Tag                 I had a good day 			    iyi bir güne sahip oldum
					Ich hatte einen sehr anstrengenden Tag    I had a very busy day 		meşgul bir gün geçirdim
					Ich war den ganzen Tag bei der Arbeit     I was at work all day 		tüm gün işteydim
					Ich habe meinen Tag genossen              I enjoyed my day 			günümün keyfini çıkardım
              ich genieße - I enjoy
              du genießt - You enjoy
              genießen - to enjoy
        
		


düzeltilecek.....
Greetings
woher kommst du?
die berufe




2 --> DEIN NAME                      
		Wie heissen Sie?                                               What is your name?
    Wie heisst du?
					Ich bin..
					Mein Name ist ...                                        * Always your full name in a confident voice!

					Es ist schön, Sie persönlich kennenzulernen              It’s nice to meet you in person
					
		Kannst du deinen Namen buchstabieren?                          Can you spell your name? (ismini harf harf söyleyebilir misin?)
					A(ey), B(bi), C(si), D(di), E(i), F(ef), G(ci), H(eyc), I(ay) 
					J(cey), K(key), L(el), M(em), N(en), O(o), P(pi), Q(kyu), R(ar)
					S(es), T(ti), U(yu), V(vi), W(dabılyu), X(eks), Y(vay), Z(zet)
					
 

3 --> DER STANDORT                            LOCATION   
		Erzähl mir von dem Ort, an dem du lebst?		tell me about the place you live?   (yaşadığın yer hakkında bana anlat)
					Ich lebe in Istanbul		I live in İstanbul
					Ich bleibe in Kadıköy		I stay in Kadıköy
					Es macht mich glücklich, mit meinen Freunden in der gleichen Nachbarschaft zusammen zu sein
										Being with my friends in the same neighborhood makes me happy
					
					Unser Haus liegt im dritten Stock			Our house is on third floor
					In unserem Garten gibt es einige Bäume und Rosen	There are some trees, and roses in our garden
					
            
		Erzähl mir etwas über deine Stadt?					tell me about your town?
					meine Stadt ist ...				my town is ...
					Es ist eine große Stadt und überfüllt genug	It is a big city and crowded enough
					Es gibt viel Spaß in der Stadt			there is much fun in the town

		Woher kommst du? (Land)							where are you from?     (country) 
					Ich bin aus der Türkei				I’m from Turkey  
					Ich lebe in Istanbul aus der Türkei		I live in İstanbul from Turkey
					Ich komme ursprünglich aus München, lebe aber jetzt in Berlin
											I’m originally from Munich but I’m now based in Berlin
					Ich komme aus Istanbul, bin geboren und aufgewachsen
							I am from İstanbul, born and bred - doğma büyüme İstanbulluyum

		Wo wohnst du? (Stadt)							where do you live?      (city)
					Ich lebe in Ankara				I live in Ankara
      
		Was ist deine Nationalität?						what is your nationality?						
					Ich bin Türke						I’m Turkish
            
		woher kommst du?							where do you come from?
					Ich komme aus der Türkei / der Schweiz / Schweden / Russland / Griechenland / Japan / Mexiko / Brasilien
						I come from Turkey / Switzerland / Sweden / Russia / Greece / Japan / Mexico / Brazil
											where did you come from?
					
		Wo ist deine Adresse?							where is your address?
					Meine Adresse liegt hinter der Saatçioğlu-Moschee	My address is behind the Saatçioğlu Mosque
						   .. in der Nähe der Hazım-Kulak-Oberschule	.. near Hazım Kulak High School
						   .. neben dem Schwimmbad in Büyük Bölcek	.. next to swimming pool in Büyük Bölcek
						   ... vor der Apotheke/Apotheke		.. in front of the chemist's/pharmacy 

					Key Words:
						„Fahren Sie geradeaus. Biegen Sie rechts ab 					"go straight / ahead. turn right
						In der Mitte sehen Sie die Bäckerei 						you will see the baker's shop in the centre
						Biegen Sie an der Ecke rechts ab, es gibt ein bekanntes Schuhgeschäft. 		turn right from the corner, there is a well-known shoes store. 
						Zwei Geschäfte weiter, sehen Sie die Bank auf der linken Seite.			two shops ahead, you will see the bank on your left."





						vor # hinter			in front of # behind		önünde # arkasında
						rechts/links			on the right / left		sağda / solda
						von rechts / links abbiegen	turn from the right / left	sağdan / soldan dön
						straße				street - sokak
						nachbarschaft			neighborhood - mahalle
						im Stadtzentrum			in city centre / downtown - şehir merkezinde  
						  
						  
           
		Wo wurden Sie geboren?				where were you born? - Nerede Doğdun?
                                    Ich wurde in Antalya geboren					I was born in Antalya
             				Ich bin in Antalya geboren und aufgewachsen                     I was born (in) and raised in Antalya


		Wann sind Sie geboren worden?						when were you born? - Ne zaman doğdun?
                                    Ich würde 1995 geboren					I was born in 1995 				nineteen ninty five
				    	       								   in 2007				twenty oh seven 
                                    Ich wurde am 27. Januar geboren			I was born on the 27th of January
				    	       am 4. Juni					on the 4th of June 		
            
		Wo bist du aufgewachsen?								where did you grow up?  
                                    Ich wuchs auf in…							I grew up in…
                                    Ich bin in LA aufgewachsen und lebe jetzt in NY			I grew up in LA, now live in NY
            
		Wie viele Jahre haben Sie dort gelebt?							how many years did you live in there?
                                    Ich habe dort zwei Jahre lang gelebt				I lived in there for two years
                                    Ich habe sieben Jahre in Ankara gelebt				I lived in Ankara for seven years 
            
		Wo wohnst du seit sieben Jahren?							where have you been living for seven years?
                                    Ich lebe seit sieben Jahren in Berlin				I have been living in Berlin for seven years
            
		Wie viele Jahre leben Sie schon in Berlin?						how many years have you been living in Berlin?
                                    Ich lebe seit zwanzig Jahren in Berlin 				I have been living in Berlin for twenty years
                                    Ich lebe seit meiner Geburt in Berlin 				I have been living in Berlin since my birth
                                    Ich lebe seit 1995 in Berlin					I have been living in Berlin since 1995


                                                            
		Wo hast du die letzten Jahre verbracht?							where have you spent the past few years?
                                    Ich habe die letzten Jahre in Paris verbracht 			I have spent the past few years in Paris
                                    Ich habe zwei Jahre in Istanbul verbracht				I have spent two years in İstanbul
                                     
                                     
                                     
4 --> POSITION and COMPANY
		Was arbeitest du?				what's your job?                                
		Was ist dein Beruf?				what's your occupation?
								what's your profession? 
		Was ist Ihre Spezialisierung?			what's your specialization? 

			Ich bin ein Lehrer mit 2 Jahren Erfahrung		I am a teacher with 2 years of experience 
                	Ich bin ein Architekt                            	I am an architect
			Ich bin Ingenieur mit 5 Jahren Erfahrung                I am an engineer with 5 years of experience
			Ich bin Techniker                       		I am a technician
			Ich bin eine Krankenschwester				I am a nurse
                        Sie ist Computer-Operatorin          			she is a computer operator
			Ich bin Software-/Computeringenieur			I am a software/computer engineer
                        Ich bin Architekt, ich zeichne Gebäude                  I am an architect, I draw buildings

		Was machst du beruflich?					what do you do for work?                        
			Ich arbeite jetzt nicht, ich bin arbeitslos		I don't work now, I am an unemployed
                        Ich arbeite jetzt nicht, ich bin Student		I am not working now, I am a student
                        Ich arbeite nicht mehr, ich bin im Ruhestand            I don't work anymore, I am retired
                        Ich habe für mehrere/verschiedene Jobs gearbeitet, jetzt bin ich im Ruhestand		I worked for several/various jobs, now i am retired
                      
		      
                                    
            	wo arbeiten Sie?									where do you work?
				Ich arbeite als Lehrer/in in einer Schule.				I work as a teacher at school
				Ich arbeite als Ingenieur/in in einer Fabrik/einem Unternehmen.		I work as an engineer in a factory/company
				Ich arbeite als Buchhalter/in in einem Hotel.				I work as an accountant in a hotel
				Ich arbeite als stellvertretende/r Leiter/in.				I work as a deputy manager
				Ich arbeite als Produktmanager/in.					I work as a product manager
				Ich arbeite als Qualitätskontrolleur/in in einer Fabrik.		I work as a quality controller in a factory
				Ich arbeite in einem Krankenhaus					I work in a hospital


		Wo hast du vorher gearbeitet?									where did you work before?
                                    Ich habe zuvor in einem Krankenhaus gearbeitet					I worked in a hospital before
                                    Ich habe zuvor in einer Bank gearbeitet						I worked in a bank before
                                    Ich habe vorher nicht gearbeitet, ich bin immer noch Student/Praktikant		I didn't work before, I'm still a student/intern
                  
                                    Ich arbeite bei „Firma“ in der „...Abteilung“			I work at ‘company’ in the ‘...department’
                                                Ich arbeite bei Google in der Marketingabteilung	I work at Google in the marketing department
                                    Ich bin eine „Position“ bei „Unternehmen“.				I am a ‘position’ at ‘company’.
                                                Ich bin Manager bei Starbucks.				I’m a manager at Starbucks.
                                    I work in ‘general area’.						Ich arbeite im „allgemeinen Bereich“.
                                                I work in sales.					Ich arbeite im Vertrieb.

					In meinem jetzigen Job bei der Firma ABC habe ich über drei Jahre ein durchschnittliches Umsatzwachstum von 12% erzielt.
					In my current job at ABC company, I achieved an average of 12 % sales growth over three years. 
				

		Wo haben Sie zuletzt gearbeitet?					where did you work last?
                                    Ich habe (zuletzt) ​​in einer Fabrik gearbeitet		I worked in a factory (last)
                                    Ich habe an einer Privatschule gearbeitet			I worked at a private school
            

		Warum haben Sie den Job verlassen? 					why did you leave (from the job?
					Ich habe meinen Job gekündigt, weil ...			I left from my job, because ...
            
		Warum haben Sie Ihren Job verlassen/gekündigt/gekündigt?					why did you leave/resign/quit from your job?
                                    weil ich meinen Job wechseln wollte							because, I wanted to change my job                          - çünkü işimi değiştirmek istedim
                                    weil ich einen neuen Job / einen besseren Job gefunden habe (woanders)		because, I found a new job / a better job (somewhere else)  - çünkü yeni bir iş / daha iyi bir iş buldum (başka yerde)
                                    weil ich mein Praktikum abgeschlossen habe						because, I (have) completed my internship                   - çünkü stajımı tamamladım
                                    weil die Arbeitsbedingungen für mich nicht gut/angemessen waren			because, work conditions weren't good/proper to me          - çünkü çalışma şartları bana iyi/uygun değildi
                                    
		Wie sieht Ihr Karriereplan für unser Unternehmen aus?		what is your career plan for our company?
                                    Ehrlich gesagt möchte ich mich mit Hilfe Ihres Unternehmens verbessern.		To be honest, I want to improve myself with the help of your company.
                                    Ich denke darüber nach, für längere Zeit zu arbeiten				I'm thinking of working for a long time
                                    Ich bin sehr bereit, Teil dieser Kultur und dieser Werte zu sein			I have much willingness about being a part of this culture and values
                                    
				    Ich glaube, dass es keinen besseren Ort gibt, um eine solche professionelle Arbeitskultur zu erwerben.
					I believe that there is no better place to acquire this kind of professional work culture.
            
		Wie lange wirst du bei uns arbeiten?				how long are you going to work with us?
            
		Was ist Ihr Ziel bei der Zusammenarbeit mit uns?		what is your purpose of working with us?

		Warum interessieren Sie sich gerade für diese Position?		Why are you interested in this position right now? 
		
		Warum sollten wir Sie nicht einstellen?				Why shouldn't we hire you?				Neden seni işe almamalıyız?
                Ich habe den Militärdienst auf 2027 verschoben			I postponed Military Service by 2027

		Ich würde gerne für große Unternehmen wie Google, Amazon, Meta, Tesla arbeiten 
				zum Thema Künstliche Intelligenz (KI)      
							I would like to work for big companies such as Google, Amazon, Meta, Tesla 
   		      		     					     on Artificial Intelligence (AI)		      



5 --> Qualifikationen
		Was studierst du?						what do you study?
                                    Ich studiere Bauingenieurwesen			I study Civil Engineering
				    Ich studiere Computertechnik			I study Computer Engineering
						Ich bin Computeringenieur		I am Computer Engineer
                                    Ich studiere Architektur				I study Architecture
                                    
		Was haben Sie studiert?						what did you study?
                                    Ich habe Elektrotechnik studiert			I studied Electrical Engineering
                                    
		Wie viele Jahre sind Sie Student/Lehrer/Ingenieur/Ökonom/Baumeister/Kellner?
										how many years are you student/teacher/engineer/economist/builder/waiter..?
                                    Ich bin seit sechzehn Jahren Student			I am student for sixteen years
                                    Ich bin seit sechs Monaten Lehrer				I am teacher for six months
                                    Ich bin seit acht Jahren Ingenieur				I am engineer for eight years
                                    Ich bin seit 2000 Krankenschwester				I am nurse since 2000
                                    Ich bin seit einundzwanzig Jahren Krankenschwester		I am nurse for twenty-one years
      
                                    Ich habe einen Associate-/Bachelor-Abschluss		I have a associate/bachelor degree - Önlisans/Lisans derecesine sahibim
                                    Ich stehe kurz vor meinem Abschluss				I’m about to graduate - nerdeyse mezunum/mezuna kaldım
                                    Ich bin ein „Fach“-Absolvent. --> Ich habe einen Abschluss in Marketing	I am a ‘subject’ graduate. --> I am a marketing graduate
                                    Ich habe einen Bachelor of Arts in Marketing.				I have a bachelor of arts degree in marketing.
                                    Ich bin Biologie-Postgraduierter				I am a biology postgrad - lisansüstü biyoloji mezunuyum
                                    Ich habe an einer Berufsschule/Universität studiert		I studied in vocational school/university
                                                            meslek lisesi/mesleki üniversitede okudum
								Ausbildung..
                                    Ich habe eine Berufsoberschule mit einem Associate Degree abgeschlossen
												I graduated from a vocational high school with an associate degree
                                                            					önlisans derecesiyle meslek yüksek okulundan mezun oldum
                                    Ich habe einen Master-/PhD-Abschluss (Doktor der Philosophie)	I have a master/PhD degree (Doctor of Philosophy)
                                    Ich habe in Saudi-Arabien eine türkische Schule besucht		I went to Turkish school in Saudi Arabia
                                    Ich besuche derzeit einen Kurs im „Theoretischen Fach“.		I am currently taking a course in ‘theorical subject’.
                                    Ich besuche derzeit einen Mathematikkurs.				I am currently taking a course in maths.
                                    Ich besuche derzeit einen Kurs zum Thema „Praktisches Thema“	I am currently taking a course on ‘practical subject’ 
      
      
                                    ... taking a ‘subject’ course
                                    Ich besuche einen Töpferkurs		I am taking a pottery course
                                    ein Kurs zur Schmuck-/Töpferherstellung	a course on jewellery/pottery making

                                    Ich habe einen Zeitkurs zum Thema „Thema“ abgeschlossen.	I have completed a ‘time’ course in/on ‘subject’.
	                                    								number-unit of time
                                    Ein 72-stündiger Fachkurs 							A 72-hour ‘subject’ course
                                    Ein dreitägiger „Fach“-Kurs							A 3-day ‘subject’ course


                                    Ich möchte ... befördert werden			I want to get promoted in Nursery
						zu meinem Zivildienst					to my civil service  --> memurluğum için terfi almak istiyorum
                                       

6 --> Erfahrung (Experience)
		* Just touch upon an experience if you want to highlight any specific quality.
				Belirli bir niteliği vurgulamak istiyorsanız, bir deneyime değinmeniz yeterlidir. 
		
		
            When did you graduate from primary/secondary school?
                                    I graduated from primary/secondary school in 2000
                                    I have ‘number’ years of experience in the ‘occupation’ field.
                                    I have 3 years of experience in the neuroscience field
                                    I have ‘number’ years of ‘occupation’ experience
                                    I have 10 years of sales experience
                                    I have worked in ‘occupation’ field for ‘unit of time’
                                    I have worked in the accounting field for three years
            What do you think about your future?
                                    I want to be a dentist in the future
                                    I want to be a music teacher


7 --> FAMILY
            how many people in your family? 
                                    There are five people in my family
                                    I have five people in my family
                                    I am from a family of four      --> (dört kişilik bir ailedenim)
                                    We are a family of four         --> (dört kişilik bir aileyiz)
            how many brothers/sisters (siblings) do you have? --> I have a brother
                                                              --> I have two sisters
      
            my family is made up of my father, mother, two brothers and two sisters
                              (benim ailem babam, annem, iki erkek kardeşim ve iki kız kardeşimden oluşur.)
            
            Tell me about your family?     
                                    My father is ...
                                    My mother is ...
                                    My brother/sister is ...
                                    My elder brother is ...
                                    My younger sister is ...
            
            How old is your brother/sister?
                                    My brother is 'number' years old
                                    My sister is 'number' years old
                  
                                    I am one of ‘number’ siblings
                                    I am one of four siblings. / I am one of four
                                    I am an only child
                                    I want to have a younger brother
                                    I am/was the first born in my family - ailemde ilk doğan çocuk benim/bendim
                                    It's tough being a middle child - ortanca çocuk olmak zor
                                    She is a middle child  - o ortanca çocuk
                                    I am an only child - ben tek çocuğum
                                    She is my youngest (daughter) - o benim en küçük/genç kızım
                                    He is my eldest son - o benim en büyük oğlum
                                    This is Chris my second child - bu Chris, benim ikinci çocuğum
                                    He is our third child - o bizim üçüncü oğlumuz
                                    she is his fourth child/daughter - o, onun dördüncü çocuğu/kızı

            How many rooms are there in your apartment/flat?
                                    There are four/five rooms in my flat
      

            Do you live with your parents?      
                                    Yes, I live with my parents
                                    No, I don't live with my parents, I live alone. 
            Are you living with your parents?   
                                    Yes, I am living with my parents
                                    No, I am not living with my parents, I live alone.

8 --> HOBBIES
            What are you interested in?
                                    I am interested in ...
                                    I am interested in playing piano
            
            What is your hobby?
	    What are your hobbies?
                                    	My hobby is ...
                                    	My hobbies are playing guitar, swimming, reading book 
					During weekends, I go to gym
            				I want to improve myself about foreign languages
					I'm currently reading a book about financial technology to better familiarize myself with the industry and its ongoing trends.
					
					
            what do you like to do?
                                    I like to play piano
                                    I really like running
                                    I really enjoy tennis
                                    I am a big fan of ‘hobby’
                                    I’m a big fan of go karting.
                                    I am a keen runner
                                    I am a keen tennis player

9 --> AGE
            May I know your age?
                                    I am ‘number’.
                                    my age is 30 y/o
                                    I am ‘number’ years old
                                    I’m in my ‘early/mid/late’ + ‘decade’.
                                    I’m in my mid-twenties
                                    She’s in her early teens
                                    He’s in his late-forties
                                    He’s a thirty-something accountant

           HINT:
                The age section is very important in engineering job applications that require some technical knowledge and experience.








### GENERAL QUESTIONS
		tell me about yourself
                                    I'm ...
                                    I am a student/teacher
                                    I am ... years old
                                    I have a brother/sister
                                    I have two brothers
                                                my first brother is thirty-five years old
                                                my second brother is twenty-two years old
      
		tell me about your best friend
                                    my best friend is ... 
                                    his name is ...
                                    her name is ...
                                    he is a very good friend
                                    he is very talkative
                                    he is ... years old
                                    he likes playing football/basketball
                                    he lives in Ankara
                                    he studies Physics/Architecture
                                    he works in a factory
                                    he sells computers
                                    we are friends with him/her since university
                                    he has black hair and blue eyes

		tell me about your home/house


		tell me about someone in your family
                                    I have a brother
                                    he has short brown hair
                                    he is shorter than me
                                    he is eleven years old. I am older than him
                                    his favorite team is Galatasaray 
                                    he plays football with his friends outside
                                    he plays games on his phone/computer
                                    we sometimes do homework together
                                    he messes with me
      
                                    I have an older/younger brother
                                    he graduated from secondary school/high school
                                    he is twenty-eight years old and he is engaged (he has a fiance)
                                    he is well-built
                                          thin
                                          fat
                                    he has black hair
                                    he works as painter/worker
                                    sometimes, we don't get along with each other (on some subjects)
                                    he sometimes says better ideas than me
      
                                    I have a sister
                                    she has blonde hair
                                    we are twins (I have a twin)
                                    she is student in primary school
                                    she doesn't like doing homework
                                    she is jealous / envious / shy / hardworking
                                    she has a dog and looks after the dog 
                                    sometimes, she goes out with her friends

 		Tell me about your job
                                    I worked as a receptionist, accountant, customer service officer, bank officer, customs officer, store manager
      					I have an organization company
      
      
		Do you like your job?
                                    I like my job
            
	 	What are the good aspects of your job?
					I can earn much money 

		What do you want to be in your future?
                                    I want to be a music teacher in my future or I want to be ... in state symphony orchestra. 
                                    I want to be a mechanical engineer in my future
                                    I want to be a lawyer or a translator in my future
                                    I want to be a pre-school teacher/an academician
		
		Where do you see yourself in 5 years?
					
		
		
		Where is your favorite country? Why?
                                    My favorite country is Scotland, because Scotland is a well-developed and peaceful country

 		what do you study?
                                    I study   
                                    I don't study
            
 		do you study or work?         (are you student or work?)
                                    No, I don't work, because I am still a student. I study ... at school/university.
                                    No, I don't study, because I work as a teacher/architect/engineer/technician/accountant
            
		what do you do in the evening?
                                    I eat dinner in the evening
                                    I watch TV in the evening
                                    I meet with friends outside and we hang out together
                                    I do my homework on computer
                                    I play computer games
                                    I do my homework, also I read a book in the evening
                                    I eat dinner / I cook dinner  
                                    I draw pictures and drink (turkish) coffee in the evening
                                    I go to sleep at eleven
            
            	do you watch TV?
                                    Yes, I do --> Yes, I sometimes watch TV
                                    No, I don't --> No, I don't watch TV much
            
            	when do you watch TV?
                                    I watch TV in the evening
            	
            	how often do you watch TV?
                                    I watch television once or twice a week
            
            	when do you go on holiday?
                                    I go on holiday once a year           (once = one time)
                                                    twice a year          (twice = two times)
                                                    three times a year
            
            	what do you do after work?
                                    I get home by car
                                    I arrive at home by foot

            	what do you do after school?
                                    I arrive at home by bus service
                                    I change my clothes
                                    I eat dinner
                                    I play online games
                                    I eat some snacks
                                    I listen to music       /     I play violin/guitar
                                    I sometimes watch movie / series
                                    I sometimes read a book
                                    I sometimes go out and walk around
                                    I study lessons / I do my homework
                                    I sleep at eleven
                                    I sleep late at two/three

            	how do you get to places?
                                    I get to places by bus
                                                    by car
                                                    by walking
                                                    by plane

            	what food do you like?
                                    I like orange fruit
                                    I like eating salad
                                    I like eating chichen wrap
                                    I like rice, beans, soup
                                    I like pastas/burger/soup

            	what films do you like?
                                    I like action/adventure films
                                           thriller films
                                           romance and comedy films
             
            	what do you do when you wake up?
                                    I wash my face and my hands
                                    I have breakfast at nine 

            	what do you do in the morning?
                                    I get up at seven in the morning
      
            	what did you do last night?
                                    I watched TV last night
                                    I talked with my friend
				    I was at school, after that I got back home
            	how often do you meet with your friends?
					I meet with my friends four times a week
			

            	how often do you go out with your friends?
                        		I go out with my friends every evening 

	    	how often do you have an English lesson?
          				I have an English Lesson twice a week
			
            	how often do you go out?
                                    I go out twice a day / a week / a month / a year
                                    I go out every day
                                    I go out every weekend

            	how do you make friends before you go to Poland?
                                    I made friends online before I go to Poland

            	what do you do in your free time?
                                    I listen to music in my free time
                                    I watch movies
                                    I like reading a book / a science fictional book

            	what do you do on your holiday?
                                    I swim, eat and drink on my holiday
            
            	who is your best friend?
                                    ABC is my best friend

            	when do you have some free time?

            	is your house big?
            
            	why are you learning English?
                                    because I want to improve myself on English
            
            	Do you play sports?
                                    Yes, I do sports at the weekend
                                    No, I don't do sports. I don't have time
            
            	what is difficult in your job?
            
            	when do you finish work?
                                    at four 
            
            	why did you start this job?

            	what did you do yesterday?
                                    I went to gym
                                    I went shopping
            
            	where did you go shopping?
            		
            	what time does your English lesson start?

            	do you have any hobby?
                                    yes, I have some hobby such as swimming, learning English

            	what other hobbies would you like to have?
            
            	when do you have time for your hobby?
            
            	do you have the same hobby as any of your friends?
            
            	do you want to change your jobs?
            
            	how do people think about you?
            
            	how often do you have an English lesson?
                                    I have an English lesson twice a week
            
            	what time do you wake up?
                                    I wake up at six
            
            	what time do you get up?
                                    I wake up at half past seven
            
            	what do you usually do at noon?
                                    I usually go out to have lunch at noon
            
            	do you have time to see your friends and family?
            
            	what time do you usually have dinner?
                                    I usually have dinner at seven
            
            	who do you spend most of your day with?
            
            	which city do you live?
                                    I live in Ankara
            
            	where do you live?
                                    I live in Istanbul
            
            	where do you usually go at the weekend?
            
            	do you like your city?
                                    I like my city
            
            	why do you like your city?
                                    Because, it's a historical and cultural city
            
            	would you like to live in a city or a town?
	    				
            
            	what do you like most about your town/city?
      					My city is very quiet and not overcrowded, therefore I like here
					
            	would you like to move to another city/town?
                                    	Yes, i would like to move to another city
				    	No, I wouldn't like to move anywhere else
				    
            	what would you like to change in your city/town?
	    				I would like to see some cultural events in my city
			
            	how do you usually go/walk/get around?
            				I walk around the city centre by walking everyday
					I get around the city by a car 
            
	    	do you spend a lot of time at work?
            				I am at work between eight am and five pm
					
            	why do you watch videos/movies/series on Netflix/Youtube?
            				
            	what is your brother/sister/husband/wife/boyfriend/girlfriend like?
            				my brother/sister/husband/wife/boyfriend/girlfriend is ...
					
					
            	what do you do to have fun with your family?
            
            	do you see your family a lot?
					I generally see my family a few times a day
            
            	do you live with your parents?
	    				I live with my parents
					I don't live with my parents
					I live alone/single
            
            	do you spend a lot of time outside the home with your family?
            				Not much. only at weekends. Usually we walk around the city centre
					
            	where can i buy a mobile phone?
                                    	you can buy a mobile phone from any store
					
            	how do you travel to places?
            				I travel to places by walking
							   by car
							   by bus
							   
            	what time do you usually go to bed?
                                    	I usually go to bed at eleven 
            
            	when is your birthday?
					my birthday is 25th January
            
            	when do you go on holiday?
                                    	I go on holiday every summer
            
            	what weather do you like?
                                    	I like sunny/rainy/cloudy
            
            	how do you usually get around?
	    				I usually get around with my parents
							     with my friends
							     with my boy friend / girl friend
            
            	what are you doing this weekend?
	    				I should go to another city this weekend
            				I am going to meet with my friends this weekend
					
            	what music do you like?
                                    	I like Rock music
            				
            	Are you good at English?
                                    	yes, I'm quite good at English
                                    	no, I'm bad at English
                                    	I'm trying to learn English
                                    	I can speak English fluently
            	What is your job?
                                    	my job is ... 
                                    	I am a/an Architect/Teacher/Engineer
                                    	I am a Boss / I have my own shop/school/factory
      
            	what kind of films do you like?
            	what films do you like?                         films = movies
                                    	I like action, science fiction films
            
            	how do you get to places?
                                    	I get to places by car
                                                    	by private jet
                                                    	by foot, by walking
           	where do you go on holiday?
                                   	I go on holiday to Antalya
            
            	how often do you play sports?
                                    	I play football once a day, on Sundays, at weekends
            
            	do you often go shopping?
                                    	yes, I often go shopping as soon as possible - evet, mümkün olduğunca sık alışverişe çıkarım
                                    	no, I go shopping once a month   - hayır, ayda bir kez alışverişe çıkarım
            
            	what have you got in your kitchen/bedroom/bathroom?
                                    	I have got fridge, oven, cupboard, spoon, knife, table in my kitchen
                                    	I have got bed, wardrobe, mirror, table, carpet in my bedroom
                                    	I have got toothbrush, soup, slipper in my bathroom
            	what is your favorite food?
                                    	my favorite food is pizza, burger, fried potatoes, kebab, rice
                                    
            	what is your favorite colour?
                                    	my favorite colour is red and black
            
            	what restaurants do you like?
                                    	I like fast-food and Italian restaurant
            
            	what is your favorite restaurant?
                                    	My favorite restaurant is fast food restaurant
            
            	how often do you go out?
                                    	I go out four times a week
                                    	I go out twice a week
            	when do you use a car?
                                    	I use the car every morning and evening
                                    	I cannot use a car because I have no driving license
            
            	how often do you drive your car?
                                    	I use my car when I need to get a place, maybe ten times a week
            
            	where do you go shopping?
                                    	I go shopping to the mall or sometimes online 

            	when do you go shopping?
                                    	I go shopping at the weekend
                                    	I don't go shopping, because I buy things online

            	what time does your English lesson start?
                                    	My English lesson starts at two in the afternoon
            
            	when do you use the internet?
                                    	I use the internet at the weekend
            
            	how often do you use the internet?
                                    	I use the internet every day
                                    	I don't use internet much
					Internet is a part of our lives
            
            	what is your husband/wife/boyfriend/girlfriend's name?
                                    	my husband/wife/boyfriend/girlfriend's name is ...
            
            	what town do you live in?
                                    	I live in Antalya 
                                    	I live in Ankara, but I study in İstanbul
            
            	what do you eat for breakfast?
                                    	I eat egg, cheese, bread for breakfast
            
            	how big is your house or flat?
                                    	my flat is quite big, there are 3 rooms and one kitchen
            
            	what music do you like?
                                    	I like rap/rock music
            
            	what kind of music do you like?
                                    	I like rock music
            
            	how old are you?
                                    	I am nineteen
            
            	what is your favorite day of the week?
                                    	my favorite day is Sunday, because I can rest all day
      
            	what time do you get up in the morning?
                                    	I get up at seven in the morning
            
	    	when do you start the day?
                                    	at half past seven in the morning
            
	   	how do you start the day?
                                    	I start the day sometimes good and bad  
            
           	how many brothers and sisters do you have?
                                    	I have one brother
            
            	who is your best friend?
                                    	my best friend is ABC
                                    	s/he studies
                                    	I walk around with her/him
            
	    	how many people in your family?
                                    	there are five people in my family
            
            	what weather do you like?
                                    	I like sunny weather, but sometimes rainy
            
            	what languages do you speak?
                                    	I speak Turkish, English
            
            	what do you do at the weekend?
                                    	I meet with my frinds at the weekend
                                    	I go out for English Course, Shopping Mall
            
	   	what subjects do you like at school?
                                    	I like Maths, English
            
            	how do you go/travel to school/work?
                                    	I go to school by bus
						       by walking
                                        	           
		Who did you look up to as a child?

		What is your favourite hobby?


---> Links
https://skillslelo.com/self-introduction-how-to-introduce-yourself/


STUDENTS' EXTRA NOTES
            I study at Fine Arts Secondary School in Ankara
            I started to study in Mechanical Engineering but I postponed to study for a while in İstanbul 
            I have a cat, a bird at home
            I have one brother/sister
            I usually spend my free time with my friends to go out
            I like reading books and I watch series or movies
            I sometimes walk around and play online games with my phone 
            I have a course from eight to seven, I arrive at there by bus/car
            I go to the course at the weekend (on saturday and sunday)
            I got bored of the school and teachers
            I want to work --> in a factory in my future
                           --> as a music teacher in my future or I want to study at Conservatory. 
                           --> as a lawyer or a psychologist in my future
                           --> as a military engineer in my future


# Extra Questions
Information Questions (W-Fragen):
	Wer ist das? (Who is that?)
	Was machst du? (What are you doing?)
	Wo wohnst du? (Where do you live?)
	Wann fängt die Party an? (When does the party start?)
	Warum hast du das getan? (Why did you do that?)
	Wie geht es dir? (How are you?)

Yes/No Questions:
	Bist du müde? (Are you tired?)
	Hast du Zeit? (Do you have time?)
	Magst du Pizza? (Do you like pizza?)
	Kannst du schwimmen? (Can you swim?)
	Ist das dein Buch? (Is that your book?)

Choice Questions:
	Möchtest du Kaffee oder Tee? (Would you like coffee or tea?)
	Gehst du ins Kino oder bleibst du zu Hause? (Are you going to the cinema or staying home?)
	Isst du lieber Burger oder Salat? (Do you prefer burgers or salads?)

Tag Questions:
	Du kommst aus Deutschland, oder? (You're from Germany, right?)
	Das war ein tolles Konzert, oder nicht? (That was a great concert, wasn't it?)
	Du magst Schokolade, stimmt's? (You like chocolate, don't you?)

Alternative Questions:
	Willst du ins Schwimmbad oder zum Park gehen? (Do you want to go to the swimming pool or the park?)
	Soll ich dich abholen oder treffen wir uns dort? (Should I pick you up or meet you there?)

Open Questions:
	Was denkst du darüber? (What do you think about it?)
	Wie fühlst du dich gerade? (How do you feel right now?)
	Was war dein Lieblingsmoment in diesem Jahr? (What was your favorite moment this year?)




Allgemeine Fragen (General Questions):
	Wie war dein Wochenende? 	(How was your weekend?)
	Was hast du gestern gemacht? 	(What did you do yesterday?)
	Was sind deine Hobbys? 		(What are your hobbies?)
	Welches Buch liest du gerade? 	(What book are you currently reading?)
	Was ist dein Lieblingsessen? 	(What is your favorite food?)

Fragen zu persönlichen Meinungen und Erfahrungen (Questions about Personal Opinions and Experiences):
	Wie findest du den Film? 				(What do you think of the movie?)
	Was war das Spannendste, was du je erlebt hast? 	(What was the most exciting thing you've ever experienced?)
	Was denkst du über das Thema Umweltschutz? 		(What do you think about the topic of environmental protection?)

Fragen nach Plänen und Zukunftsprognosen (Questions about Plans and Future Predictions):
	Was hast du für das kommende Wochenende geplant? 	(What do you have planned for the upcoming weekend?)
	Wo siehst du dich in fünf Jahren? 			(Where do you see yourself in five years?)
	Was möchtest du in deinem nächsten Urlaub unternehmen? 	(What do you want to do on your next vacation?)

Fragen nach Gefühlen und Emotionen (Questions about Feelings and Emotions):
	Wie fühlst du dich, wenn du auf der Bühne stehst? 	(How do you feel when you're on stage?)
	Was machst du, um glücklich zu sein? 			(What do you do to be happy?)
	Was löst bei dir Stress aus? 				(What causes stress for you?)

Fragen zur Meinung anderer (Questions about Others' Opinions):
	Was denkst du, wie wird das Wetter morgen? 		(What do you think, how will the weather be tomorrow?)
	Wie hat dein Freund die Nachricht aufgenommen? 		(How did your friend take the news?)

Fragen zu persönlichen Zielen und Träumen (Questions about Personal Goals and Dreams):
	Was möchtest du im Leben unbedingt erreichen? 		(What do you absolutely want to achieve in life?)
	Welche Länder möchtest du noch bereisen?		(Which countries would you like to travel to?)
	Was war schon immer dein größter Traum? 		(What has always been your biggest dream?)

Fragen zur Vergangenheit und Lebenserfahrung (Questions about the Past and Life Experience)
	Welche Reisen hast du bereits gemacht? 			(What trips have you already taken?)
	Was war das Beste, das dir je passiert ist? 		(What was the best thing that ever happened to you?)
	Was war der schwierigste Moment in deinem Leben? 	(What was the most challenging moment in your life?)


# Ice-Breakers
Was machst du gerne in deiner Freizeit?
	In meiner Freizeit lese ich gerne Bücher und gehe ins Fitnessstudio.			(In my free time, I enjoy reading books and going to the gym.)
Hast du ein Lieblingsbuch/Film?
	Mein Lieblingsbuch ist "Der Große Gatsby", und mein Lieblingsfilm ist "Inception".	(My favorite book is "The Great Gatsby," and my favorite movie is "Inception.")
Was für Musik hörst du gerne?
	Ich höre gerne Popmusik und ab und zu auch klassische Musik.				(I enjoy listening to pop music and occasionally classical music.)
Was machst du am Wochenende?
	Am Wochenende gehe ich oft ins Schwimmbad oder mache einen Spaziergang im Park.
Was war das Letzte, was du in deinem Urlaub gemacht hast?
	Im letzten Urlaub war ich in Italien und habe dort am Strand entspannt.			(During my last vacation, I was in Italy and relaxed on the beach.)
Bist du eher ein Frühaufsteher oder eine Nachteule?
	Ich bin definitiv eine Nachteule. Morgens komme ich schwer aus dem Bett.		(I'm definitely a night owl. Mornings are a struggle for me.)
Hast du irgendwelche besonderen Hobbys oder Interessen?
	Ja, ich male gerne und koche leidenschaftlich gerne neue Rezepte.			(Yes, I enjoy painting and I'm passionate about trying out new recipes in the kitchen.)
Kennst du ein gutes Restaurant hier in der Nähe?
	Ja, das Restaurant "Geschmackswelt" um die Ecke ist wirklich empfehlenswert.		(Yes, the restaurant "Geschmackswelt" around the corner is highly recommended.)
Was war das Lustigste, das dir in letzter Zeit passiert ist?
	Letzte Woche bin ich auf der Straße ausgerutscht, aber zum Glück ist nichts passiert. Es sah bestimmt lustig aus!	(Last week, I slipped on the street, but luckily nothing happened. It must have looked funny!)
Welche Art von Filme magst du am liebsten?
	Ich mag Science-Fiction-Filme sehr gerne. Die Ideen und Effekte faszinieren mich.	(I really enjoy science fiction movies. The ideas and effects fascinate me.)
Hast du schon einmal eine besondere Reise gemacht?
	Ja, ich habe einmal eine Rucksackreise durch Südostasien gemacht. Es war eine unglaubliche Erfahrung.	(Yes, I once went on a backpacking trip through Southeast Asia. It was an incredible experience.)
Welche Sprachen sprichst du außer Deutsch?
	Ich spreche außerdem fließend Englisch und ein bisschen Spanisch.			(I also speak fluent English and a bit of Spanish.)
Was war dein Traumberuf als Kind?
	Als Kind wollte ich immer Astronaut werden. Der Gedanke, ins All zu fliegen, hat mich fasziniert.	(As a child, I always wanted to become an astronaut. The idea of flying into space fascinated me.)



# Speaking Topics
Family and Friends:
	Beschreibe deine Familie. Wie viele Personen gibt es in deiner Familie?
	Hast du Geschwister? Wie verstehst du dich mit ihnen?
	Erzähle von deinem besten Freund/deiner besten Freundin.
	Wie viele Personen gibt es in deiner Familie?
	Beschreibe deine Familie. Hast du Geschwister?
	Wer sind deine Eltern? Was machen sie beruflich?
	Welche Rolle spielt deine Familie in deinem Leben?
	Wie oft triffst du dich mit deinen engsten Freunden?
	Welches Familienmitglied hast du besonders gerne?

	Freunde (Friends):
		Hast du beste Freunde? Wie habt ihr euch kennengelernt?
		Was macht ihr normalerweise zusammen?
		Warum sind Freunde wichtig?

	Beziehungen (Relationships):
		Hast du einen besten Freund/eine beste Freundin?
		Wie verstehst du dich mit deinen Geschwistern?
		Wie wichtig sind dir enge Beziehungen?


Hobbies and Interests:
	Was machst du gerne in deiner Freizeit?
	Welche Sportarten magst du?
	Magst du Musik? Welche Art von Musik hörst du gerne?

	Haben du und deine Familie gemeinsame Hobbys?
	Welche Aktivitäten teilst du gerne mit deinen Freunden?
	Welche Hobbys hat dein bester Freund/deine beste Freundin?
	Welche Sportarten hast du schon ausprobiert?
	Was machst du gerne an einem regnerischen Tag?

Daily Routine:
	Beschreibe deinen typischen Tagesablauf.
	Wann stehst du morgens/normalerweise auf?
	Was isst du normalerweise zum Frühstück?
	Was tust du vor dem Schlafengehen?
	Welche Aktivitäten gehören zu deinem Morgenritual?


Food and Drinks:
	Was isst du gerne zum Mittagessen?
	Magst du lieber Kaffee oder Tee?
	Welche Süßigkeiten magst du?
	Kannst du kochen? Was kannst du gut zubereiten?
	Welches Gericht aus einer anderen Kultur magst du am meisten?
	Was ist dein Lieblingsdessert?

Travel and Places:
	Warst du schon einmal im Ausland? Wo warst du?
	Welche Städte in Deutschland möchtest du besuchen?
	Erzähle von deinem letzten Urlaub.
	
	Gemeinsame Ausflüge (Trips Together):
		Wohin seid ihr mit deiner Familie zuletzt gereist?
		Welchen Ort würdest du gerne mit deinen Freunden besuchen?

	Welche Sehenswürdigkeiten würdest du gerne besuchen?
	Was war das interessanteste Land, das du bisher bereist hast?
	Gibt es einen Ort in deiner Stadt, den du anderen empfehlen würdest?

Daily Activities:
	Was machst du nach der Schule/Arbeit?
	Gehst du oft ins Kino oder ins Theater?
	Was machst du an einem typischen Samstag?

Clothing and Fashion:
	Was trägst du gerne in deiner Freizeit?
	Was ist dein Lieblingskleidungsstück?
	Wie kleidest du dich, wenn du zur Schule/Arbeit gehst?

School and Education:
	Welche Fächer lernst du in der Schule?
	Hast du einen Lieblingslehrer? Warum?
	Was möchtest du nach der Schule studieren?
	Welches Fach findest du am schwierigsten?
	Welche Schulfächer magst du gar nicht?

Weather and Seasons:
	Magst du den Sommer oder den Winter mehr? Warum?
	Was machst du gerne im Frühling?
	Wie ist das Wetter heute?
	Welche Aktivitäten machst du gerne im Sommer/Winter?
	Magst du den Herbst? Warum (nicht)?
	Wie beeinflusst das Wetter deine Stimmung?

Pläne für die Zukunft - Future Plans:
	Was möchtest du in den nächsten Ferien tun?
	Hast du schon Pläne für das kommende Wochenende?
	Wo möchtest du in zehn Jahren sein?
	Möchtest du später in der Nähe deiner Familie wohnen?
	Was sind deine Pläne mit deinen Freunden, wenn ihr älter seid?
	Was möchtest du beruflich erreichen?
	Hast du schon konkrete Reisepläne für die Zukunft?
	Welche persönlichen Ziele möchtest du verwirklichen?

Festivals and Celebrations:
	Welche Feiertage feierst du gerne?
	Wie verbringst du normalerweise Weihnachten oder Neujahr?
	Welche besonderen Feiern gibt es in deiner Kultur?

	Geburtstage und Feiern (Birthdays and Celebrations):
		Wann hast du Geburtstag? Wie feierst du normalerweise?
		Was habt ihr letztes Jahr zu Weihnachten gemacht?
		Welche besonderen Feiern gibt es in deiner Familie?

	Geburtstagsgeschenke (Birthday Gifts):
		Was schenkst du deinen Freunden zum Geburtstag?
		Welches war das beste Geburtstagsgeschenk, das du je bekommen hast?


Technology and Gadgets:
	Benutzt du oft das Handy oder den Computer? Wofür?
	Welche Apps benutzt du am meisten?
	Was denkst du über soziale Medien?
	Welche Apps benutzt du regelmäßig?
	Nutzt du soziale Medien? Welche Plattformen?
	Wie oft checkst du deine E-Mails?

Health and Well-being:
	Wie hältst du dich fit? Machst du Sport?
	Was isst du normalerweise zum Abendessen?
	Was machst du, wenn du dich krank fühlst?
	Wie bleibst du fit und gesund?
	Was machst du, um Stress abzubauen?
	Welche gesunden Gewohnheiten hast du?

Shopping and Buying Things:
	Gehst du gerne einkaufen? Was kaufst du gerne?
	Welche Art von Geschäften besuchst du am häufigsten?
	Was ist dein letzter großer Einkauf gewesen?
	Gehst du lieber in Geschäfte oder kaufst du online ein?
	Was ist dein Lieblingskleidungsstück? Warum?
	Wie oft kaufst du neue Kleidung?


Dreams and Aspirations:
	Was möchtest du später einmal beruflich machen?
	Welche Länder möchtest du in der Zukunft besuchen?
	Hast du Träume, die du gerne verwirklichen möchtest?
	Hast du einen Traumjob? Was fasziniert dich daran?
	Gibt es eine spezielle Fähigkeit, die du erlernen möchtest?
	Was möchtest du in den nächsten fünf Jahren erreichen?

Animals and Pets:
	Magst du Tiere? Hast du Haustiere?
	Welches Tier gefällt dir am besten? Warum?
	Hast du schon einmal einen Zoo besucht?

Transportation and Travel:
	Wie kommst du normalerweise zur Schule/Arbeit?
	Welche Verkehrsmittel benutzt du gerne auf Reisen?
	Was denkst du über umweltfreundliche Verkehrsmittel?

Movies and Entertainment:
	Schaust du gerne Filme? Welche Art von Filmen magst du?
	Welches war der letzte Film, den du gesehen hast?
	Gehst du manchmal ins Kino?

Home and Living:
	Wo wohnst du? Beschreibe deine Wohnung/dein Haus.
	Was machst du normalerweise, wenn du zu Hause bist?
	Gibt es in deinem Zuhause etwas Besonderes, das du magst?

Entertainment and Media, Books and Reading:
	Liesst du gerne Bücher? Welche Bücher magst du?
	Hast du ein Lieblingsbuch? Warum magst du es?
	Liest du lieber gedruckte Bücher oder eBooks?
	Welche Art von Filmen schaust du gerne?
	Wer ist dein Lieblingssänger/deine Lieblingssängerin?
	Hast du einen Lieblingsbuchautor/eine Lieblingsbuchautorin?

Environment and Nature:
	Welche Umweltprobleme sind dir wichtig?
	Welche Orte in der Natur besuchst du gerne?
	Was tust du, um die Umwelt zu schützen?

Cultural Interests:
	Welche kulturelle Veranstaltung hast du zuletzt besucht?
	Magst du Kunst? Welche Art von Kunst gefällt dir am meisten?
	Welche Traditionen aus anderen Ländern findest du interessant?


Zeit miteinander (Spending Time Together):
Was machst du gerne mit deiner Familie an Wochenenden?
Wie verbringst du Zeit mit deinen Freunden?
Gibt es besondere Aktivitäten, die du mit deiner Familie machst?


Streitigkeiten und Lösungen (Disagreements and Solutions):
Kommst du gut mit deinen Geschwistern aus? Warum (nicht)?
Hast du Tipps, wie man Konflikte lösen kann?
Was tust du, wenn du mit einem Freund Streit hast?

Treffen (Meetups):
Wie oft triffst du deine Familie/Freunde?
Was macht ihr normalerweise, wenn ihr euch trefft?
Was habt ihr das letzte Mal zusammen gemacht?

Erinnerungen (Memories):
Hast du eine lustige Erinnerung an deine Familie?
Was ist das Schönste, was du mit deinen Freunden erlebt hast?
Gibt es eine besondere Erinnerung an eine Feier?

Unterstützung (Support):
Wie unterstützen sich Mitglieder deiner Familie gegenseitig?
Inwiefern helfen sich Freunde in schwierigen Zeiten?
Hast du jemals von deiner Familie oder Freunden Unterstützung bekommen?


Verwandtschaft (Relatives):
Hast du Großeltern? Wie oft besuchst du sie?
Erzähle von deinen Onkeln und Tanten. Bist du ihnen nahe?


Familientraditionen (Family Traditions):
Gibt es bestimmte Traditionen in deiner Familie? Welche?
Was macht ihr normalerweise an Feiertagen zusammen?

Hausaufgaben und Projekte (Homework and Projects):
Hilft dir jemand aus deiner Familie bei Hausaufgaben oder Projekten?
Arbeitest du manchmal mit Freunden zusammen an Schulprojekten?

Sorgen und Unterstützung (Worries and Support):
An wen wendest du dich, wenn du traurig oder gestresst bist?
Wie versuchst du, Freunden in schwierigen Zeiten zu helfen?


Kindheitserinnerungen (Childhood Memories):
Welches Spiel hast du als Kind am liebsten gespielt?
Gibt es eine lustige oder besondere Erinnerung aus deiner Kindheit?


Geheimnisse und Vertrauen (Secrets and Trust):
Hast du Geheimnisse, die du nur deinen engsten Freunden erzählst?
Wie wichtig ist Vertrauen in Freundschaften?

Gemeinsame Interessen (Shared Interests):
Gibt es Dinge, die du gemeinsam mit deiner Familie oder Freunden gerne tust?
Hast du mit deinen Freunden ähnliche Hobbys?


