

Setting:
    Place:    Beach (Sunrise), Photo Session
    Time:     14 Feb.

Presentation:
    Ring
    Blue Suit and White Shoes
    Helium Balloons
    Just Married Düğün Banner
    Folyo Balon - Kalpli
    Parti Kutlama Gösteri Volkanı
    Möet Champagne - 2 adet şampanya kadehi
    

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

hello yellow
I wanna be with you everywhere
put a spell on you
you keep me under your spell
my heart is full of love and desire for u
we will never break the chain.. keep us together 
deep bond between us with your tender sweet loving
you shame the angels - melekleri utandırıyorsun.... shakespeare
promises come true, pictures come alive with you



My dearest Y,

Today, On this special day, I want to express how much you mean to me. and thank you for being the amazing person that you are. 
                                          You are kind, loving, and beautiful inside and out,


You are the rainbow drop in my life, bringing colours, joy and warmth to my heart with your presence.
                                          

You are my girlfriend, my fiance sexier than beyonce and my princess gonna-be wifey, 
  the sunshine that brightens up my day and the sunflower that brings happiness wherever you go. 

I am proud to call you my fiance..

Your love for sloths is just one of the many things that make you unique and adorable sweet like a lemon cream tart that I can never get enough of.

When we share a bottle of Sauvignon Blanc, it feels like time stands still. 
I love how we can just be ourselves around each other, and how we can talk for hours about anything and everything with our smiles and laughters.
You are my bunny lover, and I feel lucky to have you by my side, even sharing in all of the conversations about your eyelashes..
I am so grateful for your friendship, your love and your affection.


Finally, I want to let you know that you are my present, my future, my everything, 
                                                        and that you are the reason why every day feels like Christmas to me. 
                                                        You bring joy and excitement like Christmas to my life every day
                                                            
I cherish every moment we spend together and cannot wait to create even more beautiful memories with you in the years to come.

Happy Birthday, my love! May your day be filled with joy, love, and all the things that make you happy.

I love you more than words can say.

Forever and always.

A.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
28th June - Anniversary
6th May - Bday

Ay çiçekleri
Bueno
sarı 3 adet - 1 ay
beyaz 5 adet - 2 tavşan


eyelashes
blue eyes
sloth lover
rainbow drop
lemon cream tart
princess wifey
sunshine
sunflower
my fiance sexier than beyonce
sauvignon blanc
bunny lover
you are my Christmas
